breaking an egg. To obtain the things we want
requires resources, and the process of transforming what we have into what we want is
often an intricate one. In this chapter, we will discuss how monoidal preorders can help
us think about this matter.
Consider the following three questions you might ask yourself:
● Given what I have, is it possible to get what I want?
● Given what I have, what is the minimum cost to get what I want?
● Given what I have, what is the set of ways to get what I want?
These questions are about resources– those you have and those you want– but, perhaps
more importantly, they are about moving from have to want: possibility of, cost of, and
ways to.
Such questions come up not only in our lives, but also in science and industry. In
chemistry, one asks whether a certain set of compounds can be transformed into another
set, how much energy such a reaction will require, or what methods exist for making it
happen. In manufacturing, one asks similar questions.
From an external point of view, both a chemist and an industrial firm might be
regarded as store-houses of information on the above subjects. The chemist knows which
compounds she can make given other ones, and how to do so; the firm has stored knowl
edge of the same sort. The research work of the chemist and the firm is to use what they
know in order to derive– or discover– new knowledge.
This is roughly the first goal of this chapter: to discuss a formalism for express
ing recipes– methods for transforming one set of resources into another– and for
deriving new recipes from old. The idea here is not complicated, neither in life nor
in our mathematical formalism. The value added then is to simply see how it works,
so we can build on it within the book, and so others can build on it in their own
work.
We briefly discuss the categorical approach to this idea– namely that of monoidal
preorders– for building new recipes from old. The following wiring diagram shows,
assuming one knows how to implement each of the interior boxes, how to implement
the preparation of a lemon meringue pie:
2.1 Getting from a to b
39
(2.1)
The wires show resources: we start with prepared crust, lemon, butter, sugar, and egg
resources, and we end up with an unbaked pie resource. We could take this whole
method and combine it with others, e.g. baking the pie:
In the above example we see that resources are not always consumed when they are
used. For example, we use an oven to convert– or catalyze the transformation of– an
unbaked pie into a baked pie, and we get the oven back after we are done. It’s a nice
feature of ovens! To use economic terms, the oven is a “means of production” for pies.
String diagrams are important mathematical objects that will come up repeatedly in
this book. They were invented in the mathematical context– more specifically in the
context of monoidal categories– by Joyal and Street [JS93], but they have been used
less formally by engineers and scientists in various contexts for a long time.
As we said above, our first goal in this chapter is to use monoidal preorders, and
the corresponding wiring diagrams, as a formal language for building new recipes from
old. Our second goal is to discuss something called V-categories for various monoidal
preorders V.
A V-category is a set of objects, which one may think of as points on a map, where
V somehow “structures the question” of getting from point a to point b. The examples
of monoidal preorders V that we will be most interested in are called Bool and Cost.
Roughly speaking, a Bool-category is a set of points where the question of getting from
point a to point b has a true / false answer. A Cost-category is a set of points where
the question of getting from a to b has an answer d ∈[0,∞], a cost.
40
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
This story works in more generality than monoidal preorders. Indeed, in Chapter 4 we
will discuss something called a monoidal category, a notion which generalizes monoidal
preorders, and we will generalize the definition of V-category accordingly. In this more
general setting, V-categories can also address our third question above, describing meth
ods of getting between points. For example a Set-category is a set of points where the
question of getting from point a to point b has a set of answers (elements of which might
be called methods).
We will begin in Section 2.2 by defining symmetric monoidal preorders, giving a
few preliminary examples and discussing wiring diagrams. We then give many more
examples of symmetric monoidal preorders, including some real-world examples, in the
form of resource theories, and some mathematical examples that will come up again
throughout the book. In Section 2.3 we discuss enrichment and V-categories– how a
monoidal preorder V can “structure the question” of getting from a to b– and then give
some important constructions on V-categories (Section 2.4), and analyze them using a
sort of matrix multiplication technique (Section 2.5).
2.2
2.2.1
Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
In Section 1.2.2 we introduced preorders. The notation for a preorder, namely (X,≤),
refers to two pieces of structure: a set called X and a relation called ≤ that is reflexive
and transitive.
We want to add to the concept of preorders a way of combining elements in X,an
operation taking two elements and adding or multiplying them together. However, the
operation does not have to literally be addition or multiplication; it only needs to satisfy
some of the properties one expects from them.
Definition and First Examples
Webegin with a formal definition of symmetric monoidal preorders.
Definition 2.1. A(strict)symmetric monoidal structure on a preorder (X,≤) consists
of two constituents:
(i) an element I ∈ X, called the monoidal unit,
(ii) a function ⊗: X × X → X, called the monoidal product.
These constituents must satisfy the following properties, where we write ⊗(x1, x2) =
x1 ⊗x2:
(a) for all x1, x2, y1, y2 ∈ X,ifx1 ≤ y1 and x2 ≤ y2, then x1 ⊗ x2 ≤ y1 ⊗ y2,
(b) for all x ∈ X, the equations I ⊗ x = x and x ⊗ I = x hold,
(c) for all x, y,z ∈ X, the equation (x ⊗ y) ⊗ z = x ⊗(y ⊗ z) holds,
(d) for all x, y ∈ X, the equation x ⊗ y = y ⊗ x holds.
We call these conditions monotonicity, unitality, associativity, and symmetry respec
tively. A preorder equipped with a symmetric monoidal structure, (X,≤, I,⊗), is called
a symmetric monoidal preorder.
2.2SymmetricMonoidalPreorders 41
Anyonecanproposeaset X, anorder≤onX, anelement I inX, andabinary
operation⊗onXandaskwhether (X,≤,I,⊗) isasymmetricmonoidal preorder.
And it will indeed be one, as long as it satisfies rules (a), (b), (c), and (d) of
Definition2.1.
Remark2.2. It isoftenuseful toreplace=with∼ =throughoutDefinition2.1.The
resultisaperfectlygoodnotion,calledaweakmonoidalstructure.Thereasonwechose
equalityisthatitmakesequationslooksimpler,whichwehopeaidsfirst-timereaders.
Thenotationfor themonoidalunit andthemonoidalproductmayvary:monoidal
unitswehaveseenincludeI (asinthedefinition),0,1,true,false,{∗},andmore.
Monoidalproductswehaveseeninclude⊗(asinthedefinition),+,∗,∧,∨,and×.The
preferrednotationinagivensettingiswhateverbesthelpsourbrainsrememberwhat
we’retryingtodo;thenamesIand⊗arejustdefaults.
Example2.3. Thereisawell-knownpreorderstructure,denoted≤,onthesetRofreal
numbers;e.g.−5≤√2.Wepropose0asamonoidalunitand+:R×R→Rasa
monoidalproduct.Does(R,≤,0,+)satisfytheconditionsofDefinition2.1?
Ifx1≤y1andx2≤y2,itistruethatx1+x2≤y1+y2.Itisalsotruethat0+x=x
andx+0=x,that(x+y)+z=x+(y+z),andthatx+y=y+x.Thus(R,≤,0,+)
satisfiestheconditionsofbeingasymmetricmonoidalpreorder.
Exercise2.4. Consideragainthepreorder (R,≤) fromExample2.3.Someonepro
poses1asamonoidal unit and∗(usualmultiplication) asamonoidal product.But
anexpertwalksbyandsays“thatwon’twork.”Figureoutwhy,orprove theexpert
wrong!
Example2.5. AmonoidconsistsofasetM,afunction∗:M×M→Mcalledthe
monoidmultiplication,andanelemente∈Mcalledthemonoidunit,suchthat,when
youwrite∗(m,n)asm∗n,i.e.usinginfixnotation,theequations
m∗e=m, e∗m=m, (m∗n)∗p=m∗(n∗p) (2.2)
holdforallm,n,p∈M.Itiscalledcommutativeifalsom∗n=n∗m.
Everyset SdeterminesadiscretepreorderDiscS (wherem≤n iffm=n; see
Example1.27),andit iseasytocheckthat if(M,e,∗)isacommutativemonoidthen
(DiscM,=,e,∗)isasymmetricmonoidalpreorder.
Exercise2.6. Wesaiditwaseasytocheckthat if(M,∗,e)isacommutativemonoid
then(DiscM,=,∗,e)isasymmetricmonoidalpreorder.Werewetellingthetruth?
Example2.7. Hereisanon-exampleforpeoplewhoknowthegame“standardpoker.”
Let Hbe the set of all poker hands,where ahandmeans a choiceof five cards
42
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
from the standard 52-card deck. As an order, put h ≤ h if h beats or equals h in
poker.
One could propose a monoidal product ⊗: H × H → H by assigning h1 ⊗h2 to be
“the best hand one can form out of the ten cards in h1 and h2.” If some cards are in both
h1 and h2, just throw the duplicates away. So for example {2♥, 3♥, 4♥, 6♠, 7♠}⊗
{2♥, 5♥, 6♥, 6♠, 7♠}={2♥, 3♥, 4♥, 5♥, 6♥}, because the latter is the best
hand you can make with the former two.
This proposal for a monoidal structure will fail the condition (a) of Definition 2.1:it
could be the case that h1 ≤ i1 and h2 ≤ i2, and yet not be the case that h1⊗h2 ≤ i1⊗i2.
For example, consider this case:
h1 :={2♥, 3♥, 10♠, J♠, Q♠},
Here, h1 ≤ i1 and h2 ≤ i2,buth1 ⊗ h2 ={10♠, J♠, Q♠, K♠, A♠} is the best
possible hand and beats i1 ⊗ i2 ={5♠, 5♥, 6♥, 6♦, Q♦}.
i1 :={4♣, 4♠, 6♥, 6♦, 10♦},
h2 :={2♦, 3♦, 4♦, K♠, A♠},
i2 :={5♠, 5♥, 7♥, J♦, Q♦}.
Subsections 2.2.3 and 2.2.4 are dedicated to examples of symmetric monoidal pre
orders. Some are aligned with the notion of resource theories, others come from pure
math. When discussing the former, we will use wiring diagrams, so here is a quick
primer.
2.2.2
Introducing Wiring Diagrams
Wiring diagrams are visual representations for building new relationships from old. In
a preorder without a monoidal structure, the only sort of relationship between objects is
≤, and the only way you build a new ≤ relationship from old ones is by chaining them
together. We denote the relationship x ≤ y by
(2.3)
Wecanchain somenumberofthese ≤-relationships– say 0, 1, 2, or 3 of them– together
in series as shown here
(2.4)
If we add a symmetric monoidal structure, we can combine relationships not only in
series but also in parallel. Here is an example:
(2.5)
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
43
Different styles of wiring diagrams
In fact, we shall see later that there are many styles of wiring diagrams. When we are
dealing with preorders, the sort of wiring diagram we can draw is that with single-input,
single-output boxes connected in series. When we are dealing with symmetric monoidal
preorders, we can have more complex boxes and morecomplexwiringdiagrams, includ
ing parallel composition. Later we shall see that for other sorts of categorical structures
there are other styles of wiring diagrams:
Wiring diagrams for symmetric monoidal preorders
(2.6)
The style of wiring diagram that makes sense in any symmetric monoidal preorder is
that shown in Eq. (2.5): boxes can have multiple inputs and outputs, and they may be
arranged in series and parallel. Symmetric monoidal preorders and their wiring diagrams
are tightly coupled with each other. How so?
The answer is that a monoidal preorder (X,≤, I,⊗) has some notion of element
(x ∈ X), relationship (≤), and combination (using transitivity and ⊗), and so do wiring
diagrams: the wires represent elements, the boxes represent relationships, and the wiring
diagrams themselves show how relationships can be combined. We call boxes and wires
icons; we will encounter several more icons in this chapter, and throughout the book.
To get a bit more rigorous about the connection, let’s start with a monoidal preorder
(X,≤, I,⊗) as in Definition 2.1. Wiring diagrams have wires on the left and the right.
Each element x ∈ X can be made the label of a wire. Note that, given two objects x, y,
we can either draw two wires in parallel– one labeled x and one labeled y–orwecan
draw one wire labeled x ⊗ y.
We consider wires in parallel to represent the monoidal product of their labels, so we
consider both cases above to represent the element x ⊗ y. Note also that a wire labeled
I or an absence of wires:
both represent the monoidal unit I; another way of thinking of this is that the unit is the
empty monoidal product.
Awiring diagram runs between a set of parallel wires on the left and a set of parallel
wires on the right. We say that a wiring diagram is valid if the monoidal product of the
elements on the left is less than the monoidal product of those on the right. For example,
if we have the inequality x ≤ y, the the diagram that is a box with a wire labeled x on
the left and a wire labeled y on the right is valid; see the first box below:
44
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
The validity of the second box corresponds to the inequality x1 ⊗ x2 ≤ y1 ⊗ y2 ⊗ y3.
Before going on to the properties from Definition 2.1, let us pause for an example of
what we’ve discussed so far.
Example 2.8. Recall the symmetric monoidal preorder (R,≤,0,+) from Example 2.3.
The wiring diagrams for it allow wires labeled by real numbers. Drawing wires in par
allel corresponds to adding their labels, and the wire labeled 0 is equivalent to no wires
at all.
And here we express a couple of facts about (R,≤,0,+) in this language: 4 ≤ 7 and
2 +5≤−1+5+3.
We now return to how the properties of symmetric monoidal preorders correspond
to properties of this sort of wiring diagram. Let’s first talk about the order structure:
conditions (a)– reflexivity– and (b)– transitivity– from Definition 1.25. Reflexivity
says that x ≤ x, this means the diagram just consisting of a wire
is always valid. Transitivity allows us to connect facts together: it says that if x ≤ y and
y ≤z,then x ≤ z. This means that if the diagrams
are valid, we can put them together and obtain the valid diagram
Next let’s talk about the properties (a)–(d) from the definition of symmetric monoidal
structure (Definition 2.1). Property (a) says that if x1 ≤ y1 and x2 ≤ y2 then x1 ⊗ x2 ≤
y1 ⊗y2. This corresponds to the idea that stacking any two valid boxes in parallel is still
valid:
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
45
Condition (b), that I ⊗ x = x and x ⊗ I = x, says we don’t need to worry about I or
blank space; in particular diagrams such as the following are valid:
Condition (c), that (x ⊗ y) ⊗ z = x ⊗ (y ⊗ z), says that we don’t have to worry about
whether we build up diagrams from the top or from the bottom
But this looks much harder than it is: the associative property should be thought of as
saying that there is no distinction between the stuff on the very left above and the stuff
on the very right, i.e.
and indeed a diagram that moves from one to the other is valid.
Finally, the symmetry condition (d), that x ⊗ y = y ⊗ x, says that a diagram is valid
even if its wires cross:
Onemayregardthepair ofcrossing wires as another icon in our iconography, in addition
to the boxes and wires we already have.
Wiring diagrams as graphical proofs
Given a monoidal preorder X = (X,≤, I,⊗), a wiring diagram is a graphical proof of
something about X. Each box in the diagram has a left side and a right side, say x and
y, and represents the assertion that x ≤ y.
Awiring diagram is a bunch of interior boxes connected together inside an exterior box.
It represents a graphical proof that says: if all of the interior assertions are valid, then so
is the exterior assertion.
46
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
The inner boxes in diagram (2.7) translate into the assertions:
t ≤v+w, w+u≤x+z, v
and the outer box translates into the assertion:
t +u ≤ y+z.
(2.7)
+x ≤y,
(2.8)
(2.9)
The whole wiring diagram (2.7) says “if you know that the assertions in (2.8) are true,
then I am a proof that the assertion in (2.9) is also true.” What exactly is the proof that
diagram (2.7) represents? It is the proof
t +u ≤ v+w+u ≤ v+x+z ≤ y+z.
(2.10)
Indeed, each inequality here is a vertical slice of the diagram (2.7), and the transitivity
of these inequalities is expressed by connecting these vertical slices together.
Example 2.9. Recall the lemon meringue pie wiring diagram from Eq. (2.1). It has five
interior boxes, such as “separate egg” and “fill crust,” and it has one exterior box called
“Prepare lemon meringue pie.” Each box is the assertion that, given the collection of
resources on the left, say an egg, you can transform it into the collection of resources
on the right, say an egg white and an egg yolk. The whole string diagram is a proof that
if each of the interior assertions is true– i.e. you really do know how to separate eggs,
make lemon filling, make meringue, fill crust, and add meringue– then the exterior
assertion is true: you can prepare a lemon meringue pie.
Exercise 2.10. The string of inequalities in Eq. (2.10) is not quite a proof, because
technically there is no such thing as v+w+u, for example. Instead, there is (v+w)+u
and v +(w+u),and so on.
1. Formally prove, using only the rules of symmetric monoidal preorders (Defi
nition 2.1) that, given the assertions in Eq. (2.8), the conclusion in Eq. (2.9)
follows.
2. Reflexivity and transitivity should show up in your proof. Make sure you are explicit
about where they do.
3. How can you look at the wiring diagram (2.5) and know that the symmetry axiom
(Definition 2.1(d)) does not need to be invoked?
We next discuss some examples of symmetric monoidal preorders. We begin in Sec
tion 2.2.3 with some more concrete examples, from science, commerce, and informatics.
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
47
Then in Section 2.2.4 we discuss some examples arising from pure math, some of which
will get a good deal of use later on, e.g. in Chapter 4.
2.2.3
Applied Examples
Resource theories are studies of how resources are exchanged in a given arena. For
example, in social resource theory one studies a marketplace where combinations of
goods can be traded for– as well as converted into– other combinations of goods.
Whereas marketplaces are very dynamic, and an apple might be tradable for an orange
onSundaybutnotonMonday,whatwemeanbyresourcetheoryinthischapterisastatic
notion: deciding “what buys what,” once and for all.1 This sort of static notion of con
version might occur in chemistry: the chemical reactions that are possible one day will
quite likely be possible on a different day as well. Manufacturing may be somewhere in
between: the set of production techniques– whereby a company can convert one set of
resources into another– do not change much from day to day.
We learned about resource theories from [CFS16; Fri17], who go much further than
we will; see Section 2.6 for more information. In this section we will focus only on
the main idea. While there are many beautiful mathematical examples of symmetric
monoidal preorders, as we shall see in Section 2.2.4, there are also ad hoc examples com
ing from life experience. In the next chapter, on databases, we shall see the same theme:
while there are some beautiful mathematical categories out there, database schemas are
ad hoc organizational patterns of information. Describing something as “ad hoc” is often
considered derogatory, but it just means “formed, arranged, or done for a particular
purpose only.” There is nothing wrong with doing things for a particular purpose; it’s
common outside of pure math and pure art. Let’s get to it.
Chemistry
In high school chemistry, we work with chemical equations, where material collections
such as
H2O, NaCl, 2NaOH, CH4+3O2
are put together in the form of reaction equations, such as
2H2O+2Na →2NaOH+H2.
The collection on the left, 2H2O + 2Na, is called the reactant, and the collection on the
right, 2NaOH + H2, is called the product.
We can consider reaction equations such as the one above as taking place inside a
single symmetric monoidal preorder (Mat,→,0,+). Here Mat is the set of all collec
tions of atoms and molecules, sometimes called materials.SowehaveNaCl∈ Mat and
4H2O+6Ne ∈ Mat.
The set Mat has a preorder structure denoted by the → symbol, which is the preferred
symbol in the setting of chemistry. To be clear, → is taking the place of the order relation
1 Using some sort of temporal theory, e.g. the one presented in Chapter 7, one could take the notion here and
have it change in time.
48
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
≤from Definition 2.1.The+ symbol is the preferred notation for the monoidal product
in the chemistry setting, taking the place of ⊗. While it does not come up in practice,
we use 0 to denote the monoidal unit.
Exercise 2.11. Here is an exercise for people familiar with reaction equations: check
that conditions (a), (b), (c), and (d) of Definition 2.1 hold.
An important notion in chemistry is that of catalysis: one compound catalyzes a
certain reaction. For example, one might have the following set of reactions:
y +k →y+k, x+y→z, z+k→z+k.
(2.11)
Using the laws of monoidal preorders, we obtain the composed reaction
x +y+k →x+y+k→z+k→z+k.
(2.12)
Here k is the catalyst because it is found in both the reactant and the product of the
reaction. It is said to catalyze the reaction x + y → z. The idea is that the reaction
x + y → z cannot take place given the reactions in Eq. (2.11). But if k is present,
meaning if we add k to both sides, the resulting reaction can take place.
The wiring diagram for the reaction in Eq. (2.12) isshowninEq. (2.13). The three
interior boxes correspond to the three reactions given in Eq. (2.11), and the exterior box
corresponds to the composite reaction x + y + k → z + k.
Manufacturing
(2.13)
Whether we are talking about baking pies, building smart phones, or following pharma
ceutical recipes, manufacturing firms need to store basic recipes, and build new recipes
by combining simpler recipes in schemes like the one shown in Eq. (2.1)orEq.(2.13).
The basic idea in manufacturing is exactly the same as that for chemistry, except
there is an important assumption we can make in manufacturing that does not hold for
chemical reactions:
You can trash anything you want, and it disappears from view.
This simple assumption has caused the world some significant problems, but it is still in
effect. In our meringue pie example, we can ask: “what happened to the egg shell, or the
paper wrapping the stick of butter”? The answer is they were trashed, i.e. thrown in the
garbage bin. It would certainly clutter our diagram and our thinking if we had to carry
these resources through the diagram:
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
49
Instead, in our daily lives and in manufacturing, we do not have to hold on to some
thing if we don’t need it; we can just discard it. In terms of wiring diagrams, this can be
shown using a new icon
, as follows:
(2.14)
To model this concept of waste using monoidal categories, one just adds an additional
axiom to (a), (b), (c), and (d) from Definition 2.1:
(e) x ≤ I for all x ∈ X.
(discard axiom)
It says that every x can be converted into the monoidal unit I. In the notation of the
chemistry section, we would write instead x → 0: any x yields nothing. But this is
certainly not accepted in the chemistry setting. For example,
H2O+NaCl →? H2O
is certainly not a legal chemical equation. It is easy to throw things away in manufac
turing, because we assume that we have access to– the ability to grab onto and directly
manipulate– each item produced. In chemistry, when you have 1023 of substance A
dissolved in something else, you cannot just simply discard A. So axiom (e) is valid in
manufacturing but not in chemistry.
Recall that in Section 2.2.2 we said that there were many different styles of wiring
diagrams. Now we’re saying that adding the discard axiom changes the wiring dia
gram style, in that it adds this new discard icon that allows wires to terminate, as
shown in Eq. (2.14). In informatics, we will change the wiring diagram style yet
again.
50
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
Informatics
A major difference between information and a physical object is that information can
be copied. Whereas one cup of butter never becomes two, it is easy for a single email to
be sent to two different people. It is much easier to copy a music file than it is to copy a
CD. Here we do not mean “copy the information from one compact disc onto another”– of course that’s easy– instead, we mean that it’s quite difficult to copy the physical
disc, thereby forming a second physical disc! In diagrams, the distinction is between the
relation
and the relation
The former is possible, the latter is magic.
Of course material objects can sometimes be copied; cell mitosis is a case in point.
But this is a remarkable biological process, certainly not something that is expected for
ordinary material objects. In the physical world, we would make mitosis a box trans
forming one cell into two. But in (classical, not quantum) information, everything can
be copied, so we add a new icon to our repertoire.
Namely, in wiring diagram notation, copying information appears as a new icon,
allowing us to split wires:
Nowwith two copies of the email, we can send one to Alice and one to Bob.
,
(2.15)
Information can also be discarded, at least in the conventional way of thinking, so in
addition to axioms (a) to (d) from Definition 2.1, we can keep axiom (e) from page 49
and add a new copy axiom:
(f) x ≤ x +x forall x ∈ X
(copy axiom)
allowing us to make mathematical sense of diagrams like Eq. (2.15).
2.2SymmetricMonoidalPreorders 51
Nowthatwehaveexamplesofmonoidalpreordersunderourbelts,let’sdiscusssome
nicemathematicalexamples.
2.2.4 AbstractExamples
In this sectionwe discuss severalmathematical examples of symmetricmonoidal
structuresonpreorders.
Thebooleans
Thesimplestnontrivialpreorderisthebooleans:B={true,false}withfalse≤
true.Therearetwodifferentsymmetricmonoidalstructuresonit.
Example2.12(BooleanswithAND).WecandefineamonoidalstructureonBbyletting
themonoidalunitbetrueandthemonoidalproductbe∧(AND). Ifonethinksof
false=0andtrue=1, then∧correspondstotheusualmultiplicationoperation
∗.Thatis,withthiscorrespondence,thetwotablesbelowmatchup:
∧ false true
false false false
true false true
∗ 0 1
0 0 0
1 0 1
(2.16)
Onecancheckthatall thepropertiesinDefinition2.1hold,sowehaveamonoidal
preorderwhichwedenoteBool :=(B,≤,true,∧).
Boolwill be importantwhenweget to thenotionof enrichment.Enriching ina
monoidalpreorderV=(V,≤,I,⊗)means“lettingVstructurethequestionofget
tingfroma tob.”Allof thestructuresofamonoidalpreorder–i.e. thesetV, the
orderingrelation≤, themonoidalunit I,andthemonoidalproduct⊗–playarolein
howenrichmentworks.
For example, let’s lookat thecaseofBool =(B,≤,true,∧).The fact that its
underlyingsetisB={false,true}willtranslateintosayingthat“gettingfromato
bisatrue/falsequestion.”Thefact thattrueisthemonoidalunitwill translate
intosaying“youcanalwaysgetfromatoa.”Thefact that∧isthemonoidalproduct
willtranslateintosaying“ifyoucangetfromatobANDyoucangetfrombtocthen
youcangetfromatoc.”Finally,the“if–then”formoftheprevioussentenceiscoming
fromtheorderrelation≤.WewillmakethismorepreciseinSection2.3.
Wewillbeabletoplaythesamegamewithothermonoidalpreorders,asweshallsee
afterwedefineamonoidalpreordercalledCostinExample2.21.
Someothermonoidalpreorders
It isabit imprecise tocallBool “the”booleanmonoidal preorder, because there is
anothermonoidal structureon(B,≤),whichwedescribe inExercise2.13.Thefirst
structure,however,seemstobemoreusefulinpracticethanthesecond.
52 ResourceTheories:MonoidalPreordersandEnrichment
Exercise2.13. Let(B,≤)beasabove,butnowconsiderthemonoidalproducttobe∨
(OR).
∨ false true
false false true
true true true
max 0 1
0 0 1
1 1 1
WhatmustthemonoidalunitbeinordertosatisfytheconditionsofDefinition2.1?
Doesitsatisfytherestoftheconditions?
InExample2.14andExercise2.15wegivetwodifferentmonoidalstructuresonthe
preorder(N,≤)ofnaturalnumbers,where≤istheusualordering(0≤1and5≤16).
Example2.14(Naturalnumberswithaddition). Thereisamonoidal structureon(N,≤)
wherethemonoidalunitis0andthemonoidalproductis+, i.e.6+4=10.Itiseasy
tocheckthatx1≤y1andx2≤y2 impliesx1+x2≤y1+y2,aswellasall theother
conditionsofDefinition2.1.
Exercise2.15. Showthere is amonoidal structureon(N,≤)where themonoidal
productis∗,i.e.6∗4=24.Whatshouldthemonoidalunitbe?
Example2.16(Divisibilityandmultiplication). Recall fromExample1.40that there isa
“divisibility”orderonN:wewritem|ntomeanthatmdividesintonwithoutremainder.
So1|mforallmand4|12.
There is amonoidal structureon (N,| ),where themonoidal unit is1and the
monoidalproductis∗,i.e.6∗4=24.Thenifx1|y1andx2|y2,then(x1∗x2)|(y1∗y2).
Indeed, if thereissomep1,p2∈Nsuchthatx1∗p1=y1andx2∗p2=y2, then
(p1∗p2)∗(x1∗x2)=y1∗y2.
Exercise2.17. Againtakingthedivisibilityorder(N,| ),someoneproposes0asthe
monoidalunitand+asthemonoidalproduct.Doesthatproposalsatisfytheconditions
ofDefinition2.1?Whyorwhynot?
Exercise 2.18. Consider the preorder (P,≤) with Hasse diagram
no→maybe→yes.Weproposeamonoidalstructurewithyesasthemonoidal
unitand“min”asthemonoidalproduct.
1.Makesenseof“min”byfillinginthemultiplicationtablewithelementsofP.
min no maybe yes
no ? ? ?
maybe ? ? ?
yes ? ? ?
2. Checkthat theaxiomsofDefinition2.1holdforNMY:=(P,≤,yes,min),given
yourdefinitionofmin.Ifnot,changeyourdefinitionofmin.
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
53
Exercise 2.19. Let S be a set and let P(S) be its power set, the set of all subsets of
S, including the empty subset, ∅ ⊆ S, and the “everything” subset, S ⊆ S. We can
give P(S) an order: A ≤ B is given by the subset relation A ⊆ B, as discussed in
Example 1.45. We propose a symmetric monoidal structure on P(S) with monoidal unit
S and monoidal product given by intersection A ∩ B.
Does it satisfy the conditions of Definition 2.1?
Exercise 2.20. Let PropN denote the set of all mathematical statements one can make
about a natural number, where we consider two statements to be the same if one is true
if and only if the other is true. For example “n is prime” is an element of PropN, and
so are “n = 2” and “n ≥ 11.” The statements “n + 2 = 5” and “n is the least odd
prime” are considered the same. Given P, Q ∈ PropN,wesayP ≤ Q if for all n ∈ N,
whenever P(n) is true, so is Q(n).
Define a monoidal unit and a monoidal product on PropN that satisfy the conditions
of Definition 2.1.
The Monoidal preorder cost
As wesaid above, when we enrich in monoidal preorders we see them as different ways
to structure the question of “getting from here to there.” We will explain this in more
detail in Section 2.3. The following monoidal preorder will eventually structure a notion
of distance or cost for getting from here to there.
Example 2.21 (Lawvere’s monoidal preorder, Cost). Let [0,∞] denote the set of nonneg
ative real numbers– such as 0, 1, 15.333, and 2π– together with ∞. Consider the
preorder ([0,∞],≥), with the usual notion of ≥, where of course ∞≥ x for all
x ∈[0,∞].
There is a monoidal structure on this preorder, where the monoidal unit is 0 and the
monoidal product is +. In particular, x +∞=∞for any x ∈[0,∞]. Let’s call this
monoidal preorder
Cost := ([0,∞],≥,0,+),
because we can think of the elements of [0,∞] as costs. In terms of structuring “getting
from here to there,” Cost seems to say “getting from a to b is a question of cost.”
The monoidal unit being 0 will translate into saying that you can always get from
a to a at no cost. The monoidal product being + will translate into saying that the
cost of getting from a to c is at most the cost of getting from a to bplus the cost
of getting from b to c. Finally, the “at most” in the previous sentence comes from
the ≥.
The opposite of a monoidal preorder
One can take the opposite of any preorder, just flip the order: (X,≤)op := (X,≥);see
Example 1.53. Proposition 2.22 says that if the preorder had a symmetric monoidal
structure, so does its opposite.
54
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
Proposition 2.22. Suppose X = (X,≤) is a preorder and Xop = (X,≥) is its
opposite. If (X,≤, I,⊗) is a symmetric monoidal preorder then so is its opposite,
(X,≥, I,⊗).
Proof. Let’s first check monotonicity. Suppose x1 ≥ y1 and x2 ≥ y2 in Xop; we need
to show that x1 ⊗ x2 ≥ y1 ⊗ y2. But by definition of opposite order, we have y1 ≤ x1
and y2 ≤ x2 in X, and thus y1 ⊗ y2 ≤ x1 ⊗ x2 in X. Thus indeed x1 ⊗ x2 ≥ y1 ⊗ y2 in
Xop. The other three conditions are even easier; see Exercise 2.23.
Exercise 2.23. Complete the proof of Proposition 2.22 by proving that the three
remaining conditions of Definition 2.1 are satisfied.
Exercise 2.24. Since Cost is a symmetric monoidal preorder, Proposition 2.22 says that
Costop is too.
1. What is Costop as a preorder?
2. What is its monoidal unit?
3. What is its monoidal product?
2.2.5
Monoidal Monotone Maps
Recall from Example 1.44 that for any preorder (X,≤) there is an induced equivalence
relation ∼
=on X,where x ∼ = x iff both x ≤ x and x ≤ x.
Definition 2.25. Let P = (P,≤P, IP,⊗P) and Q = (Q,≤Q,IQ,⊗Q) be monoidal
preorders. A monoidal monotone from P to Q is a monotone map f : (P,≤P) →
(Q,≤Q), satisfying two conditions:
(a) IQ ≤Q f(IP),
(b) f(p1) ⊗Q f(p2) ≤Q f(p1 ⊗P p2)
for all p1, p2 ∈ P.
There are strengthenings of these conditions that are also important. If f satisfies the
following conditions, it is called a strong monoidal monotone:
(a) IQ ∼ = f(IP),
(b) f(p1) ⊗Q f(p2) ∼ = f(p1 ⊗P p2);
and if it satisfies the following conditions it is called a strict monoidal monotone:
(a ) IQ = f(IP),
(b ) f(p1)⊗Q f(p2) = f(p1 ⊗P p2).
Monoidal monotones are examples of monoidal functors, which we shall see various
incarnations of throughout the book; see Definition 6.58. What we call monoidal mono
tones could also be called lax monoidal monotones, and there is a dual notion of oplax
2.2 Symmetric Monoidal Preorders
55
monoidal monotones, where the inequalities in (a) and (b) are reversed; we will not use
oplaxity in this book.
Example 2.26. There is a monoidal monotone i : (Z,≤,0,+) → (R,≤,0,+), where
i(n) = n for all n ∈ Z. It is clearly monotonic, m ≤ n implies i(m) ≤ i(n).It iseven
strict monoidal because i(0) = 0 and i(m + n) = i(m) +i(n).
There is also a monoidal monotone f : (R,≤,0,+) → (Z,≤,0,+) going the other
way. Here f(x) := x is the floor function, e.g. f (3.14) = 3. It is monotonic because
x ≤ y implies f(x) ≤ f(y).Also f(0) = 0 and f(x) + f(y) ≤ f(x + y),soit is
a monoidal monotone. But it is not strict or even strong because f (0.5) + f (0.5)=
f (0.5 + 0.5).
Recall Bool = (B,≤,true,∧) from Example 2.12 and Cost = ([0,∞],≥,0,+)
from Example 2.21. There is a monoidal monotone g: Bool → Cost, given by
g(false) :=∞and g(true) := 0.
Exercise 2.27.
1. Check that the map g: (B,≤,true,∧) → ([0,∞],≥,0,+) presented above
indeed
● is monotonic,
● satisfies condition (a) of Definition 2.25,
● satisfies condition (b) of Definition 2.25.
2. Is g strict?
Exercise 2.28. Let Bool and Cost be as above, and consider the following quasi-inverse
functions d,u: [0,∞] → B defined as follows:
d(x) := false if x >0,
true
1. Is d monotonic?
if x = 0,
u(x) := false if x =∞,
true
2. Does d satisfy conditions (a) and (b) of Definition 2.25?
3. Is d strict?
4. Is u monotonic?
5. Does u satisfy conditions (a) and (b) of Definition 2.25?
6. Is u strict?
Exercise 2.29.
if x < ∞.
1. Is (N,≤,1,∗) a monoidal preorder, where ∗ is the usual multiplication of natural
numbers?
2. If not, why not? If so, does there exist a monoidal monotone (N,≤,0,+) →
(N,≤,1,∗)? If not, why not? If so, find it.
3. Is (Z,≤,1,∗) a monoidal preorder?
56
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
2.3
2.3.1
Enrichment
In this section we will introduce V-categories, where V is a symmetric monoidal pre
order. We shall see that Bool-categories are preorders, and that Cost-categories are a
nice generalization of the notion of metric space.
V-Categories
While V-categories can be defined even when V is not symmetric, i.e. just obeys con
ditions (a)–(c) of Definition 2.1, certain things don’t work quite right. For example, we
shall see later in Exercise 2.54 that the symmetry condition is necessary in order for
products of V-categories to exist. Anyway, here’s the definition.
Definition 2.30. Let V = (V,≤,I,⊗) be a symmetric monoidal preorder. A V
category X consists of two constituents, satisfying two properties. To specify X,
(i) one specifies a set Ob(X), elements of which are called objects;
(ii) for every two objects x, y, one specifies an element X(x, y) ∈ V, called the hom
object.2
The above constituents are required to satisfy two properties:
(a) for every object x ∈ Ob(X) we have I ≤ X(x,x),
(b) for every three objects x, y,z ∈ Ob(X),wehaveX(x, y) ⊗ X(y,z) ≤ X(x,z).
Wecall V the base of the enrichment for X or say that X is enriched in V.
Example 2.31. As we shall see in the next subsection, from every preorder we can con
struct a Bool-category, and vice versa. So, to get a feel for V-categories, let us consider
the preorder generated by the Hasse diagram
How does this correspond to a Bool-category X? Well, the objects of X are simply
the elements of the preorder, i.e. Ob(X) ={p,q,r,s,t}. Next, for every pair of objects
(2.17)
2 The word “hom” is short for homomorphism and reflects the origins of this subject. A more descriptive
name for X(x, y) might be mapping object, but we use “hom” mainly because it is an important jargon
word to know in the field.
2.3 Enrichment
57
(x, y) we need an element of B ={false,true}: simply take true if x ≤ y, and
false otherwise. So, for example, since s ≤ t and t≤ s,wehaveX(s,t) = true
and X(t,s) = false. Recalling from Example 2.12 that the monoidal unit I of Bool
is true, it’s straightforward to check that this obeys both (a) and (b), so we have a
Bool-category.
In general, it’s sometimes convenient to represent a V-category X with a square
matrix. The rows and columns of the matrix correspond to the objects of X, and the
(x, y)th entry is simply the hom-object X(x, y). So, for example, the above preorder in
Eq. (2.17) can be represented by the matrix
·≤· p q r s t
p true true true true true
q false true false true true
r false false true true true
s false false false true true
t false false false false true
2.3.2
Preorders as Bool-Categories
Our colleague Peter Gates has called category theory “a primordial ooze,” because so
much of it can be defined in terms of other parts of it. There is nowhere to rightly call
the beginning, because that beginning can be defined in terms of something else. So be
it; this is part of the fun.
Theorem 2.32. There is a one-to-one correspondence between preorders and Bool
categories.
Here we find ourselves in the ooze, because we are saying that preorders are the same
as Bool-categories, whereas Bool is itself a preorder. “So then Bool is like ...enriched
in itself?” Yes, every preorder, including Bool, is enriched in Bool, as we shall now see.
Proof of Theorem 2.32. Let’s check that we can construct a preorder from any Bool
category. Since B ={false,true}, Definition 2.30 says a Bool-category consists of
two things:
(i) a set Ob(X),
(ii) for every x, y ∈ Ob(X) an element X(x, y) ∈ B, i.e. the element X(x, y) is either
true or false.
Wewill use these two things to begin forming a preorder whose elements are the objects
of X. So let’s call the preorder (X,≤), and let X := Ob(X).For the≤ relation, let’s
declare x ≤ y iff X(x, y) = true. We have the makings of a preorder, but for it to
work, the ≤ relation must be reflexive and transitive. Let’s see if we get these from the
properties guaranteed by Definition 2.30:
58
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
(a) for every element x ∈ X we have true ≤ X(x,x),
(b) for every three elements x, y,z ∈ X we have X(x, y) ∧ X(y,z) ≤ X(x,z).
For b ∈ Bool, iftrue ≤ b then b = true, so the first statement says X(x,x) =
true, which means x ≤ x. For the second statement, one can consult Eq. (2.16). Since
false ≤ bforallb ∈ B,theonlywaystatement(b)hasanyforceisifX(x, y) = true
and X(y,z) = true, in which case it forces X(x,z) = true. This condition exactly
translates as saying that x ≤ y and y ≤ z implies x ≤ z. Thus we have obtained
reflexivity and transitivity from the two axioms of Bool-categories.
In Example 2.31, we constructed a Bool-category from a preorder. We leave it to the
reader to generalize this example and show that the two constructions are inverses; see
Exercise 2.33.
Exercise 2.33.
1. Start with a preorder (P,≤), and use it to define a Bool-category as we did in Exam
ple 2.31. In the proof of Theorem 2.32 we showed how to turn that Bool-category
back into a preorder. Show that, doing so, you get the preorder you started with.
2. Similarly, show that if you turn a Bool-category into a preorder using the above proof,
and then turn the preorder back into a Bool-category using your method, you get the
Bool-category you started with.
We now discuss a beautiful application of the notion of enriched categories: metric
spaces.
2.3.3
Lawvere Metric Spaces
Metric spaces offer a precise way to describe spaces of points, each pair of which is
separated by some distance. Here is the usual definition:
Definition 2.34. A metric space (X,d) consists of:
(i) a set X, elements of which are called points,
(ii) a function d: X × X → R≥0, where d(x,y) is called the distance between x
and y.
These constituents must satisfy four properties:
(a) for every x ∈ X,wehaved(x,x) = 0,
(b) for every x, y ∈ X,ifd(x, y) = 0 then x = y,
(c) for every x, y ∈ X,wehaved(x, y) = d(y,x),
(d) for every x, y,z ∈ X,wehaved(x, y) +d(y,z) ≥ d(x,z).
The fourth property is called the triangle inequality.
If we ask instead in (ii) for a function d: X × X →[0,∞] = R≥0 ∪{∞}, we call
(X,d) an extended metric space.
2.3 Enrichment
59
The triangle inequality says that when plotting a route from x to z, the distance is
always at most what yougetbychoosing anintermediate point y and going x → y → z.
It can be invoked in three different ways in the above picture: 3 + 5 ≥ 7.2, but also
5+7.2 ≥ 3,and 3+7.2 ≥ 5.Ohyeah, and 5+3 ≥ 7.2,7.2+5 ≥ 3,and7.2+3 ≥ 5.
The triangle inequality wonderfully captures something about distance, as does
the fact that d(x,x) = 0 for any x. However, the other two conditions are not
quite as general as we would like. Indeed, there are many examples of things that
“should” be metric spaces, but which do not satisfy conditions (b) or (c) of Defini
tion 2.34.
For example, what if we take X to be places in your neighborhood, but instead of
measuring distance, you want d(x, y) to measure effort to get from x to y. Then if there
are any hills, the symmetry axiom, d(x, y) =? d(y,x), fails: it’s easier to get from x
downhill to y then to go from y uphill to x.
Another way to find a model that breaks the symmetry axiom is to imagine that the
elements of X are not points, but whole regions such as the US, Spain, and Boston. Say
that the distance from region A to region B is understood using the setup “I will put you
in an arbitrary part of A and you just have to get anywhere in B; what is the distance
in the worst-case scenario?” So d(US,Spain) is the distance from somewhere in the
western US to the western tip of Spain: you just have to get into Spain, but you start in
the worst possible part of the US for doing so.
Exercise 2.35. Which distance is bigger under the above description, d(Spain,US) or
d(US,Spain)?
This notion of distance, which is strongly related to something called Hausdorff dis
tance,3 will again satisfy the triangle inequality, but it violates the symmetry condition.
It also violates another condition, because d(Boston,US) = 0. No matter where you
are in Boston, the distance to the nearest point of the US is 0. On the other hand,
d(US,Boston)= 0.
Finally, one can imagine a use for distances that are not finite. In terms of my effort,
the distance from here to Pluto is ∞, and it would not be any better if Pluto was still a
3 The Hausdorff distance gives a metric on the set of all subsets U ⊆ X of a given metric space (X,d).One
f
irst defines
dL(U,V) := sup
u∈U
d(u,v),
inf
v∈V
and this is exactly the formula we intend above; the result will be a Lawvere metric space. However, if one
wants the Hausdorff distance to define a (symmetric) metric, as in Definition 2.34, one must take the above
formula and symmetrize it: d(U, V) := max(dL(U,V),dL(V,U)). We happen to see the unsymmetrized
notion as more interesting.
60
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
planet. Similarly, in terms of Hausdorff distance, discussed above, the distance between
two regions is often infinite, e.g. the distance between {r ∈ R | r < 0} and {0} as subsets
of (R,d) is infinite.
When we drop conditions (b) and (c) and allow for infinite distances, we get the fol
lowing relaxed notion of metric space, first proposed by Lawvere. Recall the symmetric
monoidal preorder Cost = ([0,∞],≥,0,+) from Example 2.21.
Definition 2.36. A Lawvere metric space is a Cost-category.
This is a very compact definition, but it packs a punch. Let’s work out what it means,
by relating it to the usual definition of metric space. By Definition 2.30,aCost-category
Xconsists of:
(i) a set Ob(X),
(ii) for every x, y ∈ Ob(X) an element X(x, y) ∈[0,∞].
Here the set Ob(X) is playing the role of the set of points, and X(x, y) ∈[0,∞] is
playing the role of distance, so let’s write a little translator:
X := Ob(X),
d(x, y) := X(x, y).
The properties of a category enriched in Cost are:
(a) 0 ≥ d(x,x) for all x ∈ X,
(b) d(x, y) +d(y,z) ≥ d(x,z) for all x, y,z ∈ X.
Since d(x,x) ∈ [0,∞], if0≥ d(x,x) then d(x,x) = 0. So the first condition is
equivalent to the first condition from Definition 2.34, namely d(x, x) = 0. The second
condition is the triangle inequality.
Example 2.37. The set R of real numbers can be given a metric space structure, and
hence a Lawvere metric space structure. Namely d(x, y) :=|y − x|, the absolute value
of the difference. So d(3,7) = 4.
Exercise 2.38. Consider the symmetric monoidal preorder (R≥0,≥,0,+), which is
almost the same as Cost, except it does not include ∞. How would you characterize the
difference between a Lawvere metric space and a (R≥0,≥,0,+)-category in the sense
of Definition 2.30?
Presenting metric spaces with weighted graphs
Just as one can convert a Hasse diagram into a preorder, one can convert any weighted
graph– a graph whose edges are labeled with numbers w ≥ 0– into a Lawvere metric
2.3 Enrichment
61
space. In fact, we will consider these as graphs labeled with elements of [0,∞], and
more precisely call them Cost-weighted graphs.4
One might think of a Cost-weighted graph as describing a city with some one-way
roads (a two-way road is modeled as two one-way roads), each having some effort-to
traverse, which for simplicity we just call distance. For example, consider the following
weighted graphs:
(2.18)
Given a weighted graph, one forms a metric dX on its set X of vertices by setting d(p,q)
to be the length of the shortest path from p to q. For example, here is the the table of
distances for Y
d( ) x y z
x 0 4 3
y 3 0 6
z 7 4 0
(2.19)
Exercise 2.39. Copy and complete the following table of distances in the weighted
graph X from Eq. (2.18).
d( ) A B C D
A 0 ? ? ?
B 2 ? 5 ?
C ? ? ? ?
D ? ? ? ?
Above we converted a weighted graph G, e.g. as shown in Eq. (2.18), into a table of
distances, but this takes a bit of thinking. There is a more direct construction for taking
G andgetting a square matrix MG, whose rows and columns are indexed by the vertices
of G.Todoso,setMG to be 0along the diagonal, to be ∞ wherever an edge is missing,
and to be the edge weight if there is an edge.
4 This generalizes Hasse diagrams, which we could call Bool-weighted graphs– the edges of a Hasse
diagram are thought of as weighted with true; we simply ignore any edges that are weighted with
false, and neglect to even draw them!
62
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
For example, the matrix associated to Y in Eq. (2.18) would be
MY :=
x y z
x 0 4 3
y 3 0 ∞
z ∞ 4 0
(2.20)
As soon as you see how we did this, you’ll understand that it takes no thinking to
turn a weighted graph G into a matrix MG in this way. We shall see in Section 2.5.3
that the more difficult “distance matrices” dY, such as (2.19), can be obtained from
the easy graph matrices MY, such as (2.20), by repeating a certain sort of “matrix
multiplication.”
Exercise 2.40. Copy and complete the matrix MX associated to the graph X in
Eq. (2.18):
A B C D
A 0 ? ? ?
B 2 0 ∞ ?
C ? ? ? ?
D ? ? ? ?
MX =
2.3.4
V-Variations on Preorders and Metric Spaces
We have told the story of Bool and Cost. But in Section 2.2.4 we gave examples
of many other monoidal preorders, and each one serves as the base of enrichment
for a kind of enriched category. Which of them are useful? Something only becomes
useful when someone finds a use for it. We will find uses for some and not others,
though we encourage readers to think about what it would mean to enrich in the var
ious monoidal categories discussed above; maybe they can find a use we have not
explored.
Exercise 2.41. Recall the monoidal preorder NMY := (P,≤,yes,min) from
Exercise 2.18. Interpret what a NMY-category is.
In the next two exercises, we use V-weighted graphs to construct V-categories. This
is possible because we will use preorders that, like Bool and Cost, have joins.
Exercise 2.42. Let M be a set and let M := (P(M),⊆, M,∩) be the monoidal preorder
whose elements are subsets of M.
Someone gives the following interpretation, “for any set M, imagine it as the set
of modes of transportation (e.g. car, boat, foot). Then an M-category X tells you
all the modes that will get you from a all the way to b, for any two points a,b ∈
Ob(X).”
2.4 Constructions on V-Categories
63
1. Draw a graph with four vertices and four or five edges, each labeled with a subset of
M ={car,boat,foot}.
2. Fromthis graph is it possible to construct an M-category, where the hom-object from
x to y is computed as follows: for each path p from x to y, take the intersection of
the sets labeling the edges in p. Then, take the union of the these sets over all paths p
from x to y. Write out the corresponding 4×4-matrix of hom-objects, and convince
yourself that this is indeed an M-category.
3. Does the person’s interpretation look right, or is it subtly mistaken somehow?
Exercise 2.43. Consider the monoidal preorder W := (N ∪{∞},≤,∞,min).
1. Draw a small graph labeled by elements of N ∪{∞}.
2. Write out the matrix whose rows and columns are indexed by the nodes in the graph,
and whose (x, y)th entry is given by the maximum over all paths p from x to y of the
minimum edge label in p.
3. Prove that this matrix is the matrix of hom-objects for a W-category. This will give
you a feel for how W works.
4. Make up an interpretation, like that in Exercise 2.42, for how to imagine enrichment
in W.
2.4
2.4.1
Constructions on V-Categories
Now that we have a good intuition for what V-categories are, we give three examples
of what can be done with V-categories. The first (Section 2.4.1) is known as change of
base. This allows us to use a monoidal monotone f : V → W to construct W-categories
from V-categories. The second construction (Section 2.4.2), that of V-functors, allows
us to complete the analogy: a preorder is to a Bool-category as a monotone map is to
what? The third construction (Section 2.4.2) is known as a V-product and gives us a way
of combining two V-categories.
Changing the Base of Enrichment
Any monoidal monotone V → W between symmetric monoidal preorders lets us
convert V-categories into W-categories.
Construction 2.44. Let f : V → W be a monoidal monotone. Given a V-category C,
one forms the associated W-category, say Cf , as follows.
(i) We take the same objects: Ob(Cf ) := Ob(C).
(ii) For any c,d ∈ Ob(C), put Cf(c,d) := f(C(c,d)).
This construction Cf does indeed obey the definition of a W-category, as can be
seen by applying Definition 2.25 (of monoidal monotone) and Definition 2.30 (of
V-category):
64
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
(a) for every c ∈ C,wehave
IW ≤ f(IV)
≤ f(C(c,c))
=Cf(c,c)
(b) for every c,d,e ∈ Ob(C),wehave
Cf (c,d) ⊗W Cf(d,e) = f(C(c,d))⊗W f(C(d,e))
≤ f C(c,d)⊗V C(d,e)
≤ f(C(c,e))
=Cf(c,e)
( f is monoidal monotone)
(C is V-category)
(definition of Cf );
(definition of Cf )
( f is monoidal monotone)
(C is V-category)
(definition of Cf ).
Example 2.45. As an example, consider the function f : [0,∞] → {true,false}
given by
f (x) := true ifx =0,
(2.21)
false ifx >0.
It is easy to check that f is monotonic and that f preserves the monoidal product
and monoidal unit; that is, it’s easy to show that f is a monoidal monotone. (Recall
Exercise 2.28.)
Thus f lets us convert Lawvere metric spaces into preorders.
Exercise 2.46. Recall the “regions of the world” Lawvere metric space from Exer
cise 2.35 and the text above it. We just learned that, using the monoidal monotone f in
Eq. (2.21), we can convert it to a preorder. Draw the Hasse diagram for the preorder cor
responding to the regions US, Spain, and Boston. How could you interpret this preorder
relation?
Exercise 2.47.
1. Find another monoidal monotone g: Cost → Bool different from the one defined in
Eq. (2.21).
2. Using Construction 2.44, both your monoidal monotone g and the monoidal mono
tone f in Eq. (2.21) can be used to convert a Lawvere metric space into a
preorder. Find a Lawvere metric space X on which they give different answers,
Xf =Xg.
2.4.2
Enriched Functors
The notion of functor provides the most important type of relationship between
categories.
2.4ConstructionsonVVV-Categories 65
Definition 2.48. Let Vbe a symmetricmonoidal preorder and let XandYbe
V-categories.AV-functorfromXtoY,denotedF:X→Y,consistsofoneconstituent
(i) afunctionF: Ob(X)→Ob(Y)
subjecttooneconstraint
(a) forallx1,x2∈Ob(X),onehasX(x1,x2)≤Y(F(x1),F(x2)).
Example2.49. Forexample,wehavesaidseveral times–e.g. inTheorem2.32–that
preordersareBool-categories,whereX(x1,x2)=trueisdenotedx1 ≤x2.One
wouldhopethatmonotonemapsbetweenpreorderswouldcorrespondexactlytoBool
functors,andthat’strue.Amonotonemap(X,≤X)→(Y,≤Y)isafunctionF:X→Y
suchthat,foreveryx1,x2∈X, ifx1≤X x2thenF(x1)≤Y F(x2).Inotherwords,we
have
X(x1,x2)≤Y(F(x1),F(x2)),
wheretheabove≤takesplaceintheenrichingcategoryV=Bool; thisisexactlythe
conditionfromDefinition2.48.
Remark2.50. Infact,wehavewhatiscalledanequivalenceofcategoriesbetweenthe
categoryofpreordersandthecategoryofBool-categories. Inthenextchapterwewill
developtheideasnecessarytostatewhatthismeansprecisely(Remark3.50).
Example2.51. Lawveremetric spaces areCost-categories. ThedefinitionofCost
functorshouldhopefullyreturnanicenotion–a“friend”–fromthetheoryofmetric
spaces,anditdoes: it recoversthenotionofLipschitzfunction.ALipschitz(ormore
precisely,1-Lipschitz) functionisoneunderwhichthedistancebetweenanypairof
pointsdoesnot increase.That is,givenLawveremetricspaces(X,dX)and(Y,dY),a
Cost-functorbetweenthemisafunctionF:X→Ysuchthatforeveryx1,x2∈Xwe
havedX(x1,x2)≥dY(F(x1),F(x2)).
Exercise2.52. Theconceptsofopposite,dagger,andskeleton(seeExamples1.53and
1.67andRemark1.30)extendfrompreorders toV-categories.TheoppositeofaV
categoryXisdenotedXopandisdefinedby
(i)Ob(Xop):=Ob(X),and
(ii) forallx,y∈X,wehaveXop(x,y):=X(y,x).
AV-categoryXisadaggerV-categoryiftheidentityfunctionisaV-functor†:X→
Xop.AndaskeletalV-categoryisoneinwhichif I≤X(x,y)andI≤X(y,x), then
x=y.
Recallthatanextendedmetricspace(X,d)isaLawveremetricspacewithtwoextra
properties;seeproperties(b)and(c)inDefinition2.34.
66
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
1. Show that a skeletal dagger Cost-category is an extended metric space.
2. Use Exercise 1.68 to make sense of the following analogy: “preorders are to sets as
Lawvere metric spaces are to extended metric spaces.”
2.4.3
Product V-Categories
If V = (V,≤,I,⊗) is a symmetric monoidal preorder and X and Y are V-categories,
then we can define their V-product, which is a new V-category.
Definition 2.53. Let X and Y be V-categories. Define their V-product, or simply
product,tobetheV-category X × Y with
(i) Ob(X ×Y) := Ob(X)×Ob(Y),
(ii) (X × Y) (x, y),(x, y) := X(x,x)⊗Y(y,y),
for two objects (x, y) and (x, y) in Ob(X × Y).
Product V-categories are indeed V-categories (Definition 2.30); see Exercise 2.54.
Exercise 2.54. Let X × Y be the V-product of V-categories as in Definition 2.53.
1. Check that for every object (x, y) ∈ Ob(X×Y) we have I ≤ (X×Y) (x, y),(x, y) .
2. Check that for every three objects (x1, y1), (x2, y2), and (x3, y3),wehave
(X×Y) (x1, y1),(x2, y2)⊗(X×Y) (x2, y2),(x3, y3) ≤ (X×Y) (x1, y1),(x3, y3) .
3. We said at the start of Section 2.3.1 that the symmetry of V (condition (d) of
Definition 2.1) would be required here. Point out exactly where that condition
is used.
When taking the product of two preorders (P,≤P) × (Q,≤Q), as first described in
Example 1.51, we say that (p1,q1) ≤ (p2,q2) iff both p1 ≤ p2 ANDq1 ≤ q2;theAND
is the monoidal product ⊗ from Bool. Thus the product of preorders is an example of a
Bool-product.
Example 2.55. Let X and Y be the Lawvere metric spaces (i.e. Cost-categories) defined
by the following weighted graphs:
(2.22)
2.4 Constructions on V-Categories
67
Their product is defined by taking the product of their sets of objects, so there are six
objects in X × Y. And the distance dX×Y((x, y),(x, y)) between any two points is
given by the sum dX(x,x) +dY(y, y).
Examine the following graph, and make sure you understand how easy it is to derive
from the weighted graphs for X and Y in Eq. (2.22):
Exercise 2.56. Consider R as a Lawvere metric space, i.e. as a Cost-category (see
Example 2.37). Form the Cost-product R × R. What is the distance from (5,6) to
(−1,4)? Hint: apply Definition 2.53; the answer is not √40.
In terms of matrices, V-products are also quite straightforward. They generalize what
is known as the Kronecker product of matrices. The matrices for X and Y in Eq. (2.22)
are shown below
X A B C
A 0 2 5
B ∞ 0 3
C ∞∞ 0
and their product is:
X×Y
Y p q
p 0 5
q 8 0
(A, p) (B,p) (C,p) (A,q) (B,q) (C,q)
(A, p)
(B, p)
(C, p)
0 2 5 5 7 10
∞ 0 3 ∞ 5 8
∞ ∞ 0 ∞ ∞ 5
(A,q)
(B,q)
(C,q)
8 10 13 0 2 5
∞ 8 11 ∞ 0 3
∞ ∞ 8 ∞ ∞ 0
Wehave drawn the product matrix as a block matrix, where there is one block– shaped
like X– for every entry of Y. Make sure you can see each block as the X-matrix shifted
by an entry in Y. This comes directly from the formula from Definition 2.53 and the fact
that the monoidal product in Cost is +.
68
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
2.5
2.5.1
Computing Presented V-Categories with Matrix Multiplication
In Section 2.3.3 we promised a straightforward way to construct the matrix representa
tion of a Cost-category from a Cost-weighted graph. To do this, we use a generalized
matrix multiplication. We shall show that this works, not just for Cost, but also for
Bool, and many other monoidal preorders. The property required of the preorder is that
of being a unital, commutative quantale. These are preorders with all joins, plus one
additional ingredient, being monoidal closed, which we define next, in Section 2.5.1.
The definition of a quantale will be given in Section 2.5.2.
Monoidal Closed Preorders
The definition of V-category makes sense for any symmetric monoidal preorder V.
But that does not mean that any base of enrichment V is as useful as any other.
In this section we define closed monoidal categories, which in particular enrich
themselves! “Before you can really enrich others, you should really enrich your
self.”
Definition 2.57. A symmetric monoidal preorder V = (V,≤, I,⊗) is called symmetric
monoidal closed (or just closed) if, for every two elements v,w ∈ V, there is an element
v 
win V, called the hom-element, with the property
for all a,v,w∈ V.
(a ⊗v)≤ w iff a ≤(v w)
(2.23)
Remark2.58. Theterm‘closed’referstothefactthat a hom-element canbeconstructed
for any two elements, so the preorder can be seen as closed under the operation of
“taking homs.” In later chapters we’ll meet the closely related concepts of compact
closed categories (Definition 4.44) and cartesian closed categories (Section 7.2.1) that
make this idea more precise. See especially Exercise 7.8.
Onecan consider the hom-element v 
wasakindof“single-use v-to-w converter.”
So Eq. (2.23) says that a and v are enough to get w if and only if a is enough to get a
single-use v-to-w converter.
Exercise 2.59. Condition (2.23) says precisely that there is a Galois connection in the
sense of Definition 1.90. Let’s prove this fact. In particular, we’ll prove that a monoidal
preorder is monoidal closed iff, given any v ∈ V, themap(−⊗v): V → V given by
multiplying with v has a right adjoint. We write this right adjoint (v 
−): V →V.
1. Using Definition 2.1, show that (−⊗v) is monotone.
2. Supposing that V is closed, show that for all v,w ∈ V we have (v 
3. Using part 2, show that (v 
−) is monotone.
w)⊗v ≤w.
4. Conclude that a symmetric monoidal preorder is closed if and only if the monotone
map (−⊗v)has aright adjoint.
2.5ComputingPresentedV-CategorieswithMatrixMultiplication 69
Example2.60. ThemonoidalpreorderCost=([0,∞],≥,0,+) ismonoidalclosed.
Indeed,foranyx,y∈[0,∞],definex y:=max(0,y−x).Then,foranya,x,y∈
[0,∞],wehave
a+x≥y iff a≥y−x iff max(0,a)≥max(0,y−x) iff a≥(x y)
so satisfiestheconditionofEq.(2.23).
Note that we have not considered subtraction inCost before; we can in fact
usemonoidal closure to define subtraction in terms of the order andmonoidal
structure!
Exercise2.61. ShowthatBool=(B,≤,true,∧)ismonoidalclosed.
Example2.62. Anon-exampleis(B,≤,false,∨).Indeed,supposewehada oper
atorasinDefinition2.57.Notethatfalse≤p q,foranyp,qnomatterwhat
is,becausefalseis less thaneverything.Butusinga=false, p=true, and
q=false,wethengetacontradiction:(a∨p)≤qandyeta≤(p q).
Example2.63.Westartedthischapterbytalkingaboutresourcetheories.Whatdoesthe
closedstructurelooklikefromthatperspective?Forexample,inchemistryitwouldsay
that foreverytwomaterialcollectionsc,donecanformamaterialcollectionc d
withthepropertythat,foranya,onehas
a+c→d iff a→(c d).
Or,moredowntoearth,sincewehavethereaction2H2O+2Na→2NaOH+H2,we
mustalsohave
2H2O→(2Na (2NaOH+H2)).
So,fromjust twomoleculesofwater,youcanformacertainsubstance,andnotmany
substancesfitthebill–ourpreorderMatofchemicalmaterialsisnotclosed.
Butitisnotsofar-fetched:thishypotheticalnewsubstance(2Na (2NaOH+H2))
is not really a substance, but a potential reaction: namely that of converting
sodium to sodium-hydroxide-plus-hydrogen. Twomolecules of water unlock that
potential.
Proposition2.64. SupposeV=(V,≤,I,⊗, ) isasymmetricmonoidalpreorder
thatisclosed.Thenthefollowinghold.
(a) Foreveryv∈V, themonotonemap−⊗v: (V,≤)→(V,≤) isleftadjoint to
v −: (V,≤)→(V,≤).
70
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
(b) For any element v ∈ V and set of elements A ⊆ V, if the join a∈Aa exists then
so does a∈Av ⊗a andwehave
v ⊗
a ∼ = 
a∈A
(c) For any v,w ∈ V,wehavev ⊗(v w)≤ w.
(d) For any v ∈ V,wehavev ∼ = (I 
(v ⊗a).
a∈A
v).
(e) For any u,v,w∈ V,wehave(u v)⊗(v w)≤(u w).
Proof. We go through the claims in order.
(a) The definition of (−⊗v) being left adjoint to (v 
(2.24)
−) is exactly the condition
Eq. (2.23); see Definition 1.90 and Exercise 2.59.
(b) This follows from (a), using the fact that left adjoints preserve joins (Proposi
tion 1.104).
(c) This follows from (a), using the equivalent characterization of Galois connection in
Proposition 1.101. More concretely, from reflexivity (v 
w) ≤ (v w),we
obtain (v 
w) ⊗v ≤ wEq. (2.23), and we are done by symmetry, which says
v ⊗(v w)=(v w)⊗v.
(d) Since v⊗I = v ≤ v,Eq.(2.23)says v ≤ (I 
(I 
v) = I ⊗(I v)≤vby(c).
(e) To obtain this inequality, we just need u ⊗ (u 
follows by two applications of (c).
v). For the other direction, we have
v) ⊗ (v 
w) ≤ w. But this
One might read (c) as saying “if I have a v and a single-use v-to-w converter, I can
have a w.” One might read (d) as saying “having a v is the same as having a single-use
nothing-to-v converter.” And one might read (e) as saying “if I have a single-use u-to-v
converter and a single-use v-to-w converter, I can get a single-use u-to-w converter.”
Remark 2.65. We can consider V to be enriched in itself. That is, for every v,w ∈
Ob(V), we can define V(v,w) := (v 
w) ∈ V. For this to really be an enrichment,
we just need to check the two conditions of Definition 2.30. The first condition I ≤
X(x,x) = (x 
x) is satisfied because I ⊗ x ≤ x. The second condition is satisfied by
Proposition 2.64(e).
2.5.2
Quantales
To perform matrix multiplication over a monoidal preorder, we need one more thing:
joins. These were first defined in Definition 1.76.
Definition 2.66. A unital commutative quantale is a symmetric monoidal closed pre
order V = (V,≤, I,⊗, )thathasalljoins: A existsforevery A ⊆ V.Inparticular,
we often denote the empty join by 0 := ∅.
2.5 Computing Presented V-Categories with Matrix Multiplication
71
Whenever wespeakofquantales in this book, we mean unital commutative quantales.
We will try to remind the reader of that. There are also very interesting applications of
noncommutative quantales; see Section 2.6.
Example 2.67. In Example 2.60, we sawthat Cost is monoidal closed. To check whether
Cost is a quantale, we take an arbitrary set of elements A ⊆[0,∞] and ask if it has a
join 
A. To be a join, it needs to satisfy two properties:
a. a ≥ Aforalla ∈ A,and
b. if b ∈[0,∞] is any element such that a ≥ b for all a ∈ A, then A ≥ b.
In fact we can define such a join: it is typically called the infimum, or greatest lower
bound, of A.5 For example, if A ={2,3} then A = 2. We have joins for infinite
sets too: if B ={2.5,2.05,2.005,...}, its infimum is 2. Finally, in order to say that
([0, ∞],≥) has all joins, we need a join to exist for the empty set A = ∅ too. The first
condition becomes vacuous– there are no asinA– but the second condition says that
for any b ∈[0,∞] we have ∅ ≥ b;thismeans ∅ =∞.
Thus indeed ([0,∞],≥) has all joins, so Cost is a quantale.
Exercise 2.68.
1. What is ∅,whichwegenerally denote 0, in the case
a. V =Bool = (B,≤,true,∧)?
b. V =Cost = ([0,∞],≥,0,+)?
2. What is the join x ∨ y in the case
a. V =Bool, and x,y ∈ Bare booleans?
b. V =Cost, and x,y ∈[0,∞] are distances?
Exercise 2.69. Show that Bool = (B,≤,true,∧) is a quantale.
Exercise 2.70. Let S beasetandrecall the power set monoidal preorder (P(S),⊆, S,∩)
from Exercise 2.19. Is it a quantale?
Remark2.71. Onecanpersonifythenotionofunital, commutative quantale as a kind of
navigator. A navigator is someone who understands “getting from one place to another.”
Different navigators may care about or understand different aspects– whether one can
get from A to B, how much time it will take, what modes of travel will work, etc.– but
they certainly have some commonalities. Most importantly, a navigator needs to be able
to read a map: given routes A to B and B to C, they understand how to get a route A
to C. And they know how to search over the space of way-points to get from A to C.
These will correspond to the monoidal product and the join operations, respectively.
5 Here, by the infimum of a subset A ⊆[0,∞], we mean infimum in the usual order on [0,∞]: the largest
number that is ≤ everything in A. For example, the infimum of {3.1,3.01,3.001,...} is 3. But note that
this is the supremum in the reversed, ≥,orderofCost.
72
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
Proposition 2.72. Let P = (P,≤) be a preorder. It has all joins iff it has all meets.
Proof. The joins (resp. meets) in P are the meets (resp. joins) in Pop, so the two claims
are dual: it suffices to show that if P has all joins then it has all meets.
Suppose P has all joins and suppose that A ⊆ P is a subset for which we want the
meet. Consider the set MA :={p ∈ P | p ≤ a foralla ∈ A} of elements below
everything in A.LetmA := p∈MA 
p be their join. We claim that mA is a meet for A.
We first need to know that for any a ∈ A we have mA ≤ a, but this is by definition
of join: since all p ∈ MA satisfy p ≤ a, so does their join mA ≤ a. We second need
to know that for any m ∈ P with m≤ a for all a ∈ A,wehavem≤ m. But every
such m is actually an element of MA and m is their join, so m≤ m. This completes the
proof.
In particular, a quantale has all meets and all joins, even though we only define it to
have all joins.
Remark 2.73. The notion of Hausdorff distance can be generalized, allowing the role
of Cost to be taken by any quantale V.IfX is a V-category with objects X, and U ⊆ X
and V ⊆ X, we can generalize the usual Hausdorff distance, on the left below, to the
formula on the right:
d(U,V) := sup
u∈U
inf
v∈V
d(u,v),
X(U,V) :=
X(u,v).
u∈Uv∈V
For example, if V = Bool, the Hausdorff distance between sub-preorders U and V
answers the question “can I get into V from every u ∈ U,” i.e. ∀u∈U.∃v∈V.u ≤ v.6 Or
for another example, use V = P(M) with its interpretation as modes of transportation,
as in Exercise 2.42. Then the Hausdorff distance d(U,V) ∈ P(M) tells us those modes
of transportation that will get us into V from every point in U.
Proposition 2.74. Suppose V = (V,≤, I,⊗) is any symmetric monoidal preorder that
has all joins. Then V is closed– i.e. it has a 
operation and hence is a quantale– if
and only if ⊗ distributes over joins, i.e. if Eq. (2.24) holds for all v ∈ V and A ⊆ V.
Proof. We showed one direction in Proposition 2.64(b): if V is monoidal closed then
Eq. (2.24) holds. We need to show that if Eq. (2.24) holds then −⊗v: V → V has a
right adjoint v 
−. This is just the adjoint functor theorem, Theorem 1.108. It says
we can define v 
wto be
v 
w :=
a.
{a∈V|a⊗v≤w}
6 Here ∀ is the universal quantifier, “for all,” and ∃ is the existential quantifier, “there exists.”
2.5 Computing Presented V-Categories with Matrix Multiplication
73
2.5.3
Matrix Multiplication in a Quantale
Aquantale V = (V,≤, I,⊗, ), as defined in Definition 2.57, provides what is neces
sary to perform matrix multiplication.7 The usual formula for matrix multiplication is:
(M ∗ N)(i,k) =
M(i, j) ∗ N(j,k).
j
(2.25)
Wewill get a formula where joins stand in for the sum operation , and ⊗ stands in for
the product operation ∗. Recall our convention of writing 0 := ∅.
Definition 2.75. Let V = (V,≤,⊗, I) beaquantale. Given sets X and Y,amatrix with
entries in V,orsimplyaV-matrix, is a function M: X × Y → V. For any x ∈ X and
y ∈Y,wecall M(x,y) the (x, y)-entry.
Here is how you multiply V-matrices M: X × Y → V and N: Y × Z → V. Their
product is defined to be the matrix (M ∗ N): X × Z → V, whose entries are given by
the formula
(M ∗ N)(x,z) :=
Note how similar this is to Eq. (2.25).
M(x, y) ⊗ N(y,z).
y∈Y
(2.26)
Example 2.76. Let V = Bool. Here is an example of matrix multiplication M ∗ N.
Here X = {1,2,3}, Y = {1,2}, and Z = {1,2,3}, matrices M: X × Y → B
and N: Y × Z → Bare shown to the left below, and their product is shown to the
right:
⎛
⎞
⎝
false false
false true
true true
⎠ ∗ true true false
true false true =
⎛
⎝
false false false
true false true
true true true
The identity V-matrix on a set X is IX : X × X → V given by
IX(x, y) := I if x = y,
0 ifx=y.
⎞
⎠
Exercise 2.77. Write down the (2 × 2)-identity matrix for each of the quantales
(N,≤,1,∗), Bool = (B,≤,true,∧), and Cost = ([0,∞],≥,0,+).
Exercise 2.78. Let V = (V,≤, I,⊗, ) be a quantale. Use Eq. (2.26) and Proposi
tion 2.64 to do the following.
7 This works for noncommutative quantales as well.
74
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
1. Prove the identity law: for any sets X and Y and V-matrix M: X ×Y → V, one has
IX ∗ M = M.
2. Prove the associative law: for any matrices M : W × X → V, N : X ×Y → V, and
P: Y ×Z →V,onehas(M ∗N)∗ P = M∗(N ∗ P).
Recall the weighted graph Y from Eq. (2.18). One can read off the associated matrix
MY, and one can calculate the associated metric dY:
Here we fully explain how to compute dY using only MY.
The matrix MY can be thought of as recording the length of paths that traverse either
0 or 1 edges: the diagonals being 0 mean we can get from x to x without traversing any
edges. When we can get from x to y in one edge we record its length in MY, otherwise
we use ∞.
When we multiply MY by itself using the formula Eq. (2.26), the result M2
Y tells us
the length of the shortest path traversing two edges or fewer. Similarly M3
Y tells us about
the shortest path traversing three edges or fewer:
M2
Y =
x y z
x 0 4 3
y 3 0 6
z 7 4 0
M3
Y =
x y z
x 0 4 3
y 3 0 6
z 7 4 0
One sees that the powers stabilize: M2
Y = M3
Y; as soon as that happens one has the
matrix of distances, dY. Indeed Mn
Y records the lengths of the shortest path traverse n
edges or fewer, and the powers will always stabilize if the set of vertices is finite, since
the shortest path from one vertex to another will never visit a given vertex more than
once.8
Exercise 2.79. Recall from Exercise 2.40 the matrix MX,forX as in Eq. (2.18). Cal
culate M2
X, M3
X, and M4
X. Check that M4
X is what you got for the distance matrix in
Exercise 2.39.
This procedure gives an algorithm for computing the V-category presented by any
V-weighted graph using matrix multiplication.
8 The method works even in the infinite case: one takes the infimum of all powers Mn
Y . The result always
defines a Lawvere metric space.
2.6 Summary and Further Reading
75
2.6
Summary and Further Reading
In this chapter we thought of elements of preorders as describing resources, with the
order detailing whether one resource could be obtained from another. This naturally led
to the question of how to describe what could be built from a pair of resources, which
led us to consider monoid structures on preorders. More abstractly, these monoidal
preorders were seen to be examples of enriched categories, or V-categories, over the
symmetric monoidal preorder Bool. Changing Bool to the symmetric monoidal preorder
Cost, we arrived upon Lawvere metric spaces, a slight generalization of the usual notion
of metric space. In terms of resources, Cost-categories tell us the cost of obtaining one
resource from another.
At this point, we sought to get a better feel for V-categories in two ways. First, we
introduced various important constructions: base change, functors, products. Second, we
looked at how to present V-categories using labeled graphs; here, perhaps surprisingly,
we saw that matrix multiplication gives an algorithm to compute the hom-objects from
a labeled graph.
Resource theories are discussed in much more detail in [CFS16; Fri17]. The
authors provide many more examples of resource theories in science, includ
ing in thermodynamics, Shannon’s theory of communication channels, and quan
tum entanglement. They also discuss more of the numerical theory than we did,
including calculating the asymptotic rate of conversion from one resource into
another.
Enrichment is a fundamental notion in category theory, and we will return to it in
Chapter 4, generalizing the definition so that categories, rather than mere preorders,
can serve as bases of enrichment. In this more general setting we can still perform the
constructions we introduced in Section 2.4– base change, functors, products– and many
others; the authoratitive, but by no means easy, reference on this is the book by Kelly
[Kel05].
While preorders were familiar before category theory came along, Lawvere metric
spaces are a beautiful generalization of the previous notion of (symmetric) metric space,
that is due to, well, Lawvere. A deeper exploration than the taste we gave here can be
found in his classic paper [Law73], where he also discusses ideas like Cauchy com
pleteness in category-theoretic terms, and which hence generalize to other categorical
settings.
We observed that, while any symmetric monoidal preorder can serve as a base
for enrichment, certain preorders– quantales– are better than others. Quantales are
well known for links to other parts of mathematics too. The word quantale is in fact
a portmanteau of ‘quantum locale’, where quantum refers to quantum physics, and
locale is a fundamental structure in topology. For a book-length introduction to quan
tales and their applications, one might check [Ros90]. The notion of cartesian closed
categories, later generalized to monoidal closed categories, is due to Ronnie Brown
[Bro61].
Note that while we have considered only commutative quantales, the noncom
mutative variety also arise naturally. For example, the power set of any monoid
76
Resource Theories: Monoidal Preorders and Enrichment
forms a quantale that is commutative iff the monoid is. Another example is the set
of all binary relations on a set X, where multiplication is relational composition;
this is noncommutative. Such noncommutative quantales have application to con
currency theory, and in particular process semantics and automata; see [AV93] for
details