3 Databases:Categories,Functors,
andUniversalConstructions
3.1 WhatisaDatabase?
Integratingdatafromdisparatesourcesisamajorprobleminindustrytoday.Astudyin
2008[BH08]showedthatdataintegrationaccountsfor40%ofIT(informationtechnol
ogy)budgets,andthatthemarketfordataintegrationsoftwarewas$2.5billionin2007
andincreasingatarateofmorethan8%peryear.Inotherwords,itisamajorproblem;
butwhatisit?
Adatabaseisasystemofinterlockingtables
Databecomesinformationwhenit isstoredinagivenformation.That is, thenumbers
andlettersdon’tmeananythinguntil theyareorganized,oftenintoasystemof inter
lockingtables.Anorganizedsystemofinterlockingtablesiscalledadatabase.Hereis
afavoriteexample:
Employee FName WorksIn Mngr
1 Alan 101 2
2 Ruth 101 2
3 Kris 102 3
Department DName Secr
101 Sales 1
102 IT 3
(3.1)
Thesetwotablesinterlockbyuseofaspecialleft-handcolumn,demarcatedbyaverti
calline;itiscalledtheIDcolumn.TheIDcolumnofthefirsttableiscalled“Employee,”
andtheIDcolumnofthesecondtableiscalled“Department.”TheentriesintheIDcol
umn–e.g.1,2,3or101,102–arelikerowlabels; theyindicateawholerowof the
tablethey’rein.Thuseachrowlabelmustbeunique(notworowsinatablecanhave
thesamelabel),sothatitcanunambiguouslyspecifyitsrow.
Eachtable’sIDcolumn,andthesetofuniqueidentifiersfoundtherein,iswhatallows
for theinterlockingmentionedabove. Indeed,otherentries invarious tablescanref
erencerows inagiventablebyuseof itsIDcolumn.Forexample,eachentryinthe
WorksIncolumnreferencesadepartment foreachemployee;eachentryintheMngr
(manager)columnreferencesanemployeeforeachemployee, andeachentryinthe
Secr(secretary)columnreferencesanemployeeforeachdepartment.Managingallthis
cross-referencingisthepurposeofdatabases.
Lookingbackat tables(3.1),onemightnoticethateverynon-IDcolumn, foundin
either table, isareference toa labelof somesort.Someof these, namelyWorksIn,
78
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Mngr, and Secr, are internal references, often called foreign keys; they refer to rows
(keys) in the ID column of another (foreign) table. Others, namely FName and DName,
are external references; they refer to strings or integers, which can also be thought
of as labels, whose meaning is known more broadly. Internal reference labels can be
changed as long as the change is consistent– 1 could be replaced by 1001 every
where without changing the meaning– whereas external reference labels certainly
cannot! Changing Ruth to Bruce everywhere would change how people understood the
data.
The reference structure for a given database– i.e. how tables interlock via foreign
keys– tells us something about what information was intended to be stored in it. One
may visualize the reference structure for Eq. (3.1) graphically as follows:
(3.2)
This is a kind of “Hasse diagram for a database,” much like the Hasse diagrams for
preorders in Remark 1.34. How should you read it?
The two tables from Eq. (3.1) are represented in the graph (3.2) by the two black
nodes, which are given the same name as the ID columns: Employee and Department.
There is another node– drawn white rather than black– which represents the external
reference type of strings, like “Alan,” “Alpha,” and “Sales.” The arrows in the diagram
represent non-ID columns of the tables; they point in the direction of reference: WorksIn
refers an employee to a department.
Exercise 3.1. Count the number of non-ID columns in Eq. (3.1). Count the number of
arrows (foreign keys) in Eq. (3.2). They should be the same number in this case; is this
a coincidence?
A Hasse-style diagram like the one in Eq. (3.2) can be called a database schema; it
represents how the information is being organized, the formation in which the data is
kept. One may add rules, sometimes called “business rules” to the schema, in order to
ensure the integrity of the data. If these rules are violated, one knows that data being
entered does not conform to the way the database designers intended. For example, the
designers may enforce rules saying
● every department’s secretary must work in that department;
● every employee’s manager must work in the same department as the employee.
Doing so changes the schema, say from ‘easySchema’ (3.2) to ‘mySchema’ below.
3.1 What is a Database?
79
(3.3)
In other words, the difference is that easySchema plus constraints equals mySchema.
We will soon see that database schemas are categories C, that the data itself is
given by a “set-valued” functor C → Set, and that databases can be mapped to each
other via functors C → D. In other words, there is a relatively large overlap between
database theory and category theory. This has been worked out in a number of papers;
see Section 3.6. It has also been implemented in working software, called FQL, which
stands for functorial query language. Here is example FQL code for the schema shown
above:
schema mySchema = {
nodes
Employee, Department;
attributes
DName : Department-> string,
FName : Employee-> string;
arrows
Mngr
: Employee-> Employee,
WorksIn : Employee-> Department,
Secr
: Department-> Employee;
equations
Department.Secr.WorksIn = Department,
Employee.Mngr.WorksIn
}
= Employee.WorksIn;
Communication between databases
We have said that databases are designed to store information about something. But
different people or organizations might view the same sort of thing in different ways.
For example, one bank stores its financial records according to European standards and
another does so according to Japanese standards. If these two banks merge into one, they
will need to be able to share their data despite differences in the shape of their database
schemas.
Such problems are huge and intricate in general, because databases often comprise
hundreds or thousands of interlocking tables. Moreover, these problems occur more
frequently than just when companies want to merge. It is quite common that a given
company moves data between databases on a daily basis. The reason is that different
ways of organizing information are convenient for different purposes. Just like we pack
our clothes in a suitcase when traveling but use a closet at home, there is generally not
one best way to organize anything.
80
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Category theory provides a mathematical approach for translating between these dif
ferent organizational forms. That is, it formalizes a sort of automated reorganizing
process called data migration, which takes data that fits snugly in one schema and moves
it into another.
Here is a simple case. Imagine an airline company has two different databases,
perhaps created at different times, that hold roughly the same data.
(3.4)
Schema A has more detail than schema B–anairlineseatmaybe infirst classor
economy– but they are roughly the same. We shall see that they can be connected by a
functor, and that data conforming to A can be migrated through this functor to schema
B and vice versa.
The statistics at the beginning of this section show that this sort of problem– when
occurring at enterprise scale– continues to prove difficult and expensive. If one attempts
to move data from a source schema to a target schema, the migrated data could fail to fit
into the target schema or fail to satisfy some of its constraints. This happens surprisingly
often in the world of business: a night may be spent moving data, and the next morning
it is found to have arrived broken and unsuitable for further use. In fact, it is believed
that over half of database migration projects fail.
In this chapter, we will discuss a category-theoretic method for migrating data. Using
categories and functors, one can prove up front that a given data migration will not fail,
i.e. that the result is guaranteed to fit into the target schema and satisfy all its constraints.
The material in this chapter gets to the heart of category theory: in particular, we
discuss categories, functors, natural transformations, adjunctions, limits, and colimits.
In fact, many of these ideas have been present in the discussion above:
● Theschema pictures, e.g. Eq. (3.3), depict categories C.
● Theinstances, e.g. Eq. (3.1), are functors from C to a certain category called Set.
● The implicit mapping in Eq. (3.4), which takes economy and first class seats in A to
airline seats in B, constitutes a functor A → B.
● The notion of data migration for moving data between schemas is formalized by
adjoint functors.
3.2 Categories
81
Webegin in Section 3.2 with the definition of categories and a bunch of different sorts
of examples. In Section 3.3 we bring back databases, in particular their instances and the
maps between them, by discussing functors and natural transformations. In Section 3.4
we discuss data migration by way of adjunctions, which generalize the Galois connec
tions we introduced in Section 1.4. Finally in Section 3.5 we give a bonus section on
limits and colimits.1
3.2
Categories
A category C consists of four pieces of data– objects, morphisms, identities, and a
composition rule– satisfying two properties, as described below.
Definition 3.2. To specify a category C:
(i) one specifies a collection2 Ob(C), elements of which are called objects;
(ii) for every two objects c,d, one specifies a set C(c,d),3 elements of which are called
morphisms from c to d;
(iii) for every object c ∈ Ob(C), one specifies a morphism idc ∈ C(c,c), called the
identity morphism on c;
(iv) for every three objects c,d,e ∈ Ob(C) and morphisms f ∈ C(c,d) and g ∈ C(d,e),
one specifies a morphism f g ∈ C(c,e), called the composite of f and g.
We will sometimes write an object c ∈ C, instead of c ∈ Ob(C). It will also be conve
nient to denote elements f ∈ C(c,d) as f : c → d. Here, c is called the domain of f,
and d is called the codomain of f .
These constituents are required to satisfy two conditions:
(a) unitality: for any morphism f : c → d, composing with the identities at c or d does
nothing: idc f = f and f idd = f;
(b) associativity: for any three morphisms f : c0 → c1, g: c1 → c2, and h: c2 → c3,
the following are equal: ( f g) h = f (g h). We write this composite simply as
f 
g h.
Our next goal is to give lots of examples of categories. Our first source of examples
is that of free and finitely presented categories, which generalize the notion of Hasse
diagram from Remark 1.34.
1 By“bonus,” we mean that although not strictly essential to the understanding of this particular chapter,
limits and colimits will show up throughout the book and throughout one’s interaction with category
theory, and we think the reader will especially benefit from this material in the long run.
2 Here, a collection can be thought of as a bunch of things, just like a set, but that may be too large to
formally be a set. An example is the collection of all sets, which would run afoul of Russell’s paradox if it
were itself a set.
3 This set C(c,d) is often denoted HomC(c,d), and called the “hom-set from c to d.” The word “hom” stands
for homomorphism, of which the word “morphism” is a shortened version.
82
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
3.2.1
Free Categories
Recall from Definition 1.31 that a graph consists of two types of thing: vertices and
arrows. From there one can define paths, which are just head-to-tail sequences of arrows.
Every path p has a start vertex and an end vertex; if p goes from v to w, we write
p: v → w. To every vertex v, there is a trivial path, containing no arrows, starting
and ending at v; we often denote it by idv or simply by v. We may also concatenate
paths: given p: v → w and q: w → x, their concatenation is denoted p q, and it
goes v → x.
In Chapter 1, we used graphs to depict preorders (V,≤): the vertices form the ele
ments of the preorder, and we say that v ≤ w if there is a path from v to w in G.We
will now use graphs in a very similar way to depict certain categories, known as free
categories. Then we will explain a strong relationship between preorders and categories
in Section 3.2.3.
Definition 3.3. For any graph G = (V, A,s,t), we can define a category Free(G),
called the free category on G, whose objects are the vertices V and whose morphisms
from c to d are the paths from c to d. The identity morphism on an object c is simply
the trivial path at c. Composition is given by concatenation of paths.
For example, we define 2 to be the free category generated by the graph shown below:
(3.5)
It has two objects v1 and v2, and three morphisms: idv1 
: v1 → v1, f1: v1 → v2, and
idv2 
: v2 → v2.Hereidv1 
is the path of length 0 starting and ending at v1, f1 is the path
of length 1 consisting of just the arrow f1, and idv2 
is the length 0 path at v2. As our
notation suggests, idv1 
is the identity morphism for the object v1, and similarly idv2 
for
v2. As composition is given by concatenation, we have, for example, idv1 
f1 = f1,
idv2 
idv2 
= idv2
, and so on.
From now on, we may elide the difference between a graph and the corresponding
free category Free(G), at least when the one we mean is clear enough from context.
Exercise 3.4. For Free(G) to really be a category, we must check that this data we
specified obeys the unitality and associativity properties. Check that these are obeyed
for any graph G.
Exercise 3.5. The free category on the graph shown here:4
(3.6)
4 Asmentioned above, we elide the difference between the graph and the corresponding free category.
3.2Categories 83
hasthreeobjectsandsixmorphisms:thethreeverticesandsixpathsinthegraph.
Createsixnames,oneforeachof thesixmorphismsin3.Writedownasix-by-six
table,labeltherowsandcolumnsbythesixnamesyouchose.
1. Copyandcompletethetablebywritingthenameofthecompositeineachcell,when
thereisacomposite.
2.Wherearetheidentities?
Exercise3.6. Let’smakesomedefinitions,basedonthepatternabove:
1.Whatisthecategory1?Thatis,whatareitsobjectsandmorphisms?
2.Whatisthecategory0?
3.Whatistheformulaforthenumberofmorphismsinnforarbitraryn∈N?
Example3.7(Naturalnumbersasafreecategory). Considerthefollowinggraph:
(3.7)
Ithasonlyonevertexandonearrow,but ithas infinitelymanypaths. Indeed, ithas
auniquepathof lengthnforeverynaturalnumbern∈N.That is,Path={z,s,(s
s),(s s s),...},wherewewritezforthelength0pathonz;itrepresentsthemorphism
idz.Thereisaone-to-onecorrespondencebetweenPathandthenaturalnumbers,N=
{0,1,2,3,...}.
Thisisanexampleofacategorywithoneobject.Acategorywithoneobjectiscalled
amonoid,anotionwefirstdiscussedinExample2.5.Therewesaidthatamonoidis
atuple(M,∗,e)where∗:M×M→Misafunctionande∈Misanelement,and
m∗1=m=1∗mand(m∗n)∗p=m∗(n∗p).
Thetwonotionsmaysuperficiallylookdifferent,but it iseasytodescribethecon
nection.GivenacategoryCwithoneobject, say•, letM :=C(•,•), let e=id•,
and let ∗:C(•,•)×C(•,•)→C(•,•)be thecompositionoperation∗= .The
associativityandunitalityrequirementsfor themonoidwillbesatisfiedbecauseCis
acategory.
Exercise3.8. InExample3.7we identified thepathsof the loopgraph(3.7)with
numbersn∈N.Pathscanbeconcatenated.Givennumbersm,n∈N,whatnumber
correspondstotheconcatenationoftheirassociatedpaths?
3.2.2 PresentingCategoriesviaPathEquations
SoforanygraphG, there isafreecategoryonG.Butwedon’thave tostopthere:
wecanaddequationsbetweenpathsinthegraph,andstillgetacategory.Weareonly
84
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
allowed to equate two paths p and q when they are parallel, meaning they have the same
source vertex and the same target vertex.
A finite graph with path equations is called a finite presentation for a category,
and the category that results is known as a finitely presented category.Hereare two
examples:
Both of these are presentations of categories: in the left-hand one, there are no equations
so it presents a free category, as discussed in Section 3.2.1. The free square category has
ten morphisms, because every path is a unique morphism.
Exercise 3.9.
1. Write down the ten paths in the free square category above.
2. Name two different paths that are parallel.
3. Name two different paths that are not parallel.
On the other hand, the category presented on the right has only nine morphisms,
because f h and g i aremadeequal.This category is called the “commutative square.”
Its morphisms are
{A, B,C, D, f,g,h,i, f h}.
One might say “the missing one is g i,” but that is not quite right: g i is there too,
because it is equal to f h. As usual, A denotes idA,etc.
Exercise 3.10. Write down all the morphisms in the category presented by the
following diagram:
85
3.2 Categories
Example 3.11. We should also be aware that enforcing an equation between two
morphisms often implies additional equations. Here are two more examples of presen
tations, in which this phenomenon occurs:
In C wehave the equation s s = z. But this implies s s s = z s = s! And similarly
we have s s s s =z z =z.ThesetofmorphismsinCisinfact merely {z,s}, with
composition described by s s = z z = z, and z s = s z = s. In group theory, one
would speak of a group called Z/2Z.
Exercise 3.12. WritedownallthemorphismsinthecategoryDfromExample3.11. 
Remark 3.13. We can now see that the schemas in Section 3.1, e.g. Eqs. (3.2)
and (3.3), are finite presentations of categories. We will come back to this idea in
Section 3.3.
3.2.3
Preorders and Free Categories: Two Ends of a Spectrum
Now that we have used graphs to depict preorders in Chapter 1 and categories above,
we may want to know the relationship between these two uses. The main idea we want
to explain now is that
“A preorder is a category where every two parallel arrows are the same.”
Thus any preorder can be regarded as a category, and any category can be somehow
“crushed down” into a preorder. Let’s discuss these ideas.
Preorders as categories
Suppose (P,≤) is a preorder. It specifies a category P as follows. The objects of P
are precisely the elements of P; that is, Ob(P) = P. As for morphisms, P has exactly
one morphism p → q if p ≤ q and no morphisms p → q if p≤ q. The fact that
≤is reflexive ensures that every object has an identity, and the fact that ≤ is transitive
ensures that morphisms can be composed. We call P the category corresponding to the
preorder (P,≤).
In fact, a Hasse diagram for a preorder can be thought of a presentation of a cat
egory where, for all vertices p and q, every two paths from p → q are declared
equal. For example, in Eq. (1.3) we saw a Hasse diagram that was like the graph on the
left:
86
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
The Hasse diagram (left) might look the most like the free category presentation
(middle) which has no equations, but that is not correct. The free category has three
morphisms (paths) from bottom object to top object, whereas preorders are categories
with at most one morphism between two given objects. Instead, the diagram on the
right, with these paths from bottom to top made equal, is the correct presentation for the
preorder on the left.
Exercise 3.14. What equations would you need to add to the graphs below in order to
present the associated preorders?
The preorder reflection of a category
Given any category C, one can obtain a preorder (C,≤) from it by destroying the dis
tinction between any two parallel morphisms. That is, let C := Ob(C), and put c1 ≤ c2
iff C(c1,c2)= ∅. If there is one, or two, or fifty, or infinitely many morphisms c1 → c2
in C, the preorder reflection does not see the difference. But it does see the difference
between some morphisms and no morphisms.
Exercise 3.15. What is the preorder reflection of the category N from Example 3.7? 
Wehave only discussed adjoint functors between preorders, but soon we will discuss
adjoints in general. Here is a statement you might not understand exactly, but it’s true;
you can ask a category theory expert about it and they should be able to explain it to
you:
Considering a preorder as a category is right adjoint to turning a category into a preorder by
preorder reflection.
Remark 3.16 (Ends of a spectrum). The main point of this subsection is that both pre
orders and free categories are specified by a graph without path equations, but they
denote opposite ends of a spectrum. In both cases, the vertices of the graph become the
3.2 Categories
87
objects of a category and the paths become morphisms. But in the case of free cate
gories, there are no equations so each path becomes a different morphism. In the case
of preorders, all parallel paths become the same morphism. Every category presenta
tion, i.e. graph with some equations, lies somewhere in between the free category (no
equations) and its preorder reflection (all possible equations).
3.2.4
Important Categories in Mathematics
We have been talking about category presentations, but there are categories that are
best understood directly, not by way of presentations. Recall the definition of category
from Definition 3.2. The most important category in mathematics is the category of
sets.
Definition 3.17. The category of sets, denoted Set, is defined as follows.
(i) Ob(Set) is the collection of all sets.
(ii) If S and T are sets, then Set(S,T) ={f : S → T | f is a function}.
(iii) For each set S, the identity morphism is the function idS: S → S given by
idS(s) := s for each s ∈ S.
(iv) Given f : S → T and g: T → U, their composite is the function f g: S → U
given by ( f g)(s) := g(f(s)).
These definitions satisfy the unitality and associativity conditions, so Set is indeed a
category.
Closely related is the category FinSet. This is the category whose objects are finite
sets and whose morphisms are functions between them.
Exercise 3.18. Let 2 ={1,2} and 3 ={1,2,3}. These are objects in the category
Set discussed in Definition 3.17. Write down all the elements of the set Set(2,3); there
should be nine.
Remark 3.19. You may have wondered what categories have to do with V-categories
(Definition 2.30); perhaps you think the definitions hardly look alike. Despite the term
“enriched category,” V-categories are not categories with extra structure. While some
sorts of V-categories, such as Bool-categories, i.e. preorders, can naturally be seen as
categories, other sorts, such as Cost-categories, cannot.
Thereason for the importance of Set is that, if we generalize the definition of enriched
category (Definition 2.30), we find that categories in the sense of Definition 3.2 are
exactly Set-categories– so categories are V-categories for a very special choice of
V. We’ll come back to this in Section 4.4.4. For now, we simply remark that just
like a deep understanding of the category Cost– e.g. knowing that it is a quantale– yields insight into Lawvere metric spaces, so the study of Set yields insights into
categories.
88
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
There are many other categories that mathematicians care about:
● Top: the category of topological spaces (neighborhood),
● Grph: the category of graphs (connection),
● Meas: the category of measure spaces (amount),
● Mon:the category of monoids (action),
● Grp: the category of groups (reversible action, symmetry),
● Cat: the category of categories (action in context, structure).
But in fact, this does not at all do justice to the diversity of categories mathematicians
think about. They work with whatever category they find fits their purpose at the time,
like “the category of connected Riemannian manifolds of dimension at most 4.”
Here is one more source of examples: take any category you already have and reverse
all its morphisms; the result is again a category.
Example 3.20. Let C be a category. Its opposite, denoted Cop, is the category with the
same objects, Ob(Cop) := Ob(C), and for any two objects c,d ∈ Ob(C), one has
Cop(c,d) := C(d,c). Identities and composition are as in C.
3.2.5
Isomorphisms in a Category
The previous sections have all been about examples of categories: free categories, pre
sented categories, and important categories in math. In this section, we briefly switch
gears and talk about an important concept in category theory, namely the concept of
isomorphism.
In a category, there is often the idea that two objects are interchangeable. For example,
in the category Set, one can exchange the set { , } for the set {0,1} and everything
will be the same, other than the names for the elements. Similarly, if one has a preorder
with elements a,b, such that a ≤ b and b ≤ a, i.e. a ∼
= b, then a and b are essentially
the same. How so? Well, they act the same, in that for any other object c, we know that
c ≤aiff c ≤ b, and c ≥ a iff c ≥ b. The notion of isomorphism formalizes this notion
of interchangeability.
Definition 3.21. An isomorphism is a morphism f : A → B such that there exists a
morphism g: B → A satisfying f g = idA and g f = idB. In this case we call f
and g inverses, and we often write g = f−1, or equivalently f = g−1. We also say that
A and B are isomorphic objects.
Example 3.22. The set A :={a,b,c} and the set 3 ={1,2,3} are isomorphic, i.e. there
exists an isomorphism f : A → 3 given by f(a) = 2, f(b) = 1, f(c) = 3. The
isomorphisms in the category Set are bijections.
3.3 Functors,NaturalTransformations,andDatabases 89
Recall that thecardinalityofafiniteset isthenumberofelementsinit.Thiscanbe
understoodintermsofisomorphismsinFinSet.Namely,foranyfinitesetA∈FinSet,
itscardinalityisthenumbern∈NsuchthatthereexistsanisomorphismA∼ =n.Georg
CantordefinedthecardinalityofanysetX tobeits isomorphismclass,meaningthe
equivalenceclassconsistingofallsetsthatareisomorphictoX.
Exercise3.23.
1.Whatistheinverse f−1:3→Aofthefunction f giveninExample3.22?
2. HowmanydistinctisomorphismsarethereA→3?
Exercise3.24. Showthat inanygivencategoryC, foranygivenobject c∈C, the
identityidc isanisomorphism.
Exercise3.25. RecallExamples3.7and3.11.Amonoidinwhicheverymorphismis
anisomorphismisknownasagroup.
1. IsthemonoidinExample3.7agroup?
2.WhataboutthemonoidCinExample3.11?
Exercise3.26. LetGbeagraph,andletFree(G)bethecorrespondingfreecategory.
SomebodytellsyouthattheonlyisomorphismsinFree(G)aretheidentitymorphisms.
Isthatpersoncorrect?Whyorwhynot?
Example3.27. Inthisexample,weshallseethatitispossibleforgand f tobealmost–butnotquite–inverses,inacertainsense.
Considerthefunctions f :2→3andg:3→2drawnbelow:
Thenthereadershouldbeabletocheckinstantlythat f g=id2butg f=id3.Thus
f andgarenotinversesandhencenotisomorphisms.Wewon’tneedthisterminology,
butcategorytheoristswouldsaythat f andgformaretraction.
3.3 Functors,NaturalTransformations,andDatabases
InSection3.1weshowedsomedatabaseschemas:graphswithpathequations.Thenin
Section3.2.2wesaidthatgraphswithpathequationscorrespondtofinitelypresented
90
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
categories. Now we want to explain what the data in a database is, as a way to introduce
functors. To do so, we begin by noticing that sets and functions– the objects and
morphisms in the category Set– can be captured by particularly simple databases.
3.3.1
Sets and Functions as Databases
Planet of Sol
Mercury
Venus
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Prime number
The first observation is that any set can be understood as a table with only one column:
the ID column.
2
3
5
7
11
13
17
Flying pig
.
.
.
Rather than put the elements of the set between braces, e.g. {2,3,5,7,11,...}, we write
them down as rows in a table.
In databases, single-column tables are often called controlled vocabularies, or master
data. Now to be honest, we can only write out every single entry in a table when its set of
rows is finite. A database practitioner might find the idea of our prime number table a bit
unrealistic. But we’re mathematicians, so since the idea makes perfect sense abstractly,
we will continue to think of sets as one-column tables.
The above databases have schemas consisting of just one vertex:
Obviously, there’s really not much difference between these schemas, other than the
label of the unique vertex. So we could say “sets are databases whose schema consists
of a single vertex.” Let’s move on to functions.
Afunction f : A → B canalmost be depicted as a two-column table
Beatle Played
George leadguitar
John rhythmguitar
Paul bassguitar
Ringo drums
except it is unclear whether the elements of the right-hand column exhaust all of B.
What if there are rock-and-roll instruments out there that none of the Beatles played? So
a function f : A → B requires two tables, one for A and its f column, and one for B:
3.3 Functors, Natural Transformations, and Databases
91
Beatle Played
George leadguitar
John rhythmguitar
Paul bassguitar
Ringo drums
Rock-and-roll instrument
bass guitar
drums
keyboard
lead guitar
rhythm guitar
Thus the database schema for any function is just a labeled version of 2:
The lesson is that an instance of a database takes a presentation of a category, and turns
every vertex into a set, and every arrow into a function. As such, it describes a map
from the presented category to the category Set. In Section 2.4.2 we saw that maps of
V-categories are known as V-functors. Similarly, we call maps of plain old categories
functors.
3.3.2
Functors
Afunctor is a mapping between categories. It sends objects to objects and morphisms to
morphisms, while preserving identities and composition. Here is the formal definition.
Definition 3.28. Let C and D be categories. To specify a functor from C to D, denoted
F: C →D,
(i) for every object c ∈ Ob(C), one specifies an object F(c) ∈ Ob(D);
(ii) for every morphism f : c1 → c2 in C, one specifies a morphism F(f): F(c1) →
F(c2) in D.
The above constituents must satisfy two properties:
(a) for every object c ∈ Ob(C),wehaveF(idc) = idF(c);
(b) for every three objects c1,c2,c3 ∈ Ob(C) and two morphisms f ∈ C(c1,c2), g ∈
C(c2,c3), the equation F( f g) = F( f) F(g) holds in D.
Example 3.29. For example, here we draw three functors F : 2 → 3:
92 Databases:Categories,Functors,andUniversalConstructions
Ineachcase, thedottedarrowsshowwhatthefunctorFdoestotheverticesin2;once
that informationisspecified, it turnsout–inthisspecialcase–thatwhatFdoes to
thethreepathsin2iscompletelydetermined.Intheleft-handdiagram,Fsendsevery
pathtothe trivialpath, i.e. the identityonn0. InthemiddlediagramF(m0)=n0,
F(f1)=g1,andF(m1)=n1.Intheright-handdiagram,F(m0)=n0,F(m1)=n2,
andF(f1)=g1 g2.
Exercise3.30. Abovewewrotedownthreefunctors2→3.Findandwritedownall
theremainingfunctors2→3.
Example3.31. Recall thecategoriespresentedbyFree_squareandComm_square in
Section3.2.2.Heretheyareagain,with addedtothelabels inFree_squaretohelp
distinguishthem:
There are lots of functors from the free square category (let’s call it F) to the
commutativesquarecategory(let’scallitC).
However, thereisexactlyonefunctorF:F→CthatsendsA toA,B toB,C to
C,andD toD.Thatis,oncewehavemadethisdecisionabouthowFactsonobjects,
eachofthetenpathsinFisforcedtogotoacertainpathinC: theonewiththeright
sourceandtarget.
Exercise3.32. SaywhereeachofthetenmorphismsinFissentunderthefunctorF
fromExample3.31.
Allofourexamplefunctorssofarhavebeencompletelydeterminedbywhattheydo
onobjects,butthisisusuallynotthecase.
Exercise 3.33. Consider the free categories C = •→• andD= •⇒•.
Give two functors F,G:C→Dthat act the sameonobjects but differentlyon
morphisms.
Example 3.34. There are also lots of functors fromthe commutative square cate
goryCtothefreesquarecategoryF,butnonethatsendsAtoA,BtoB,CtoC,
andDtoD.ThereasonisthatifFweresuchafunctor,thensince f h=g i inC,we
3.3 Functors,NaturalTransformations,andDatabases 93
wouldhaveF(f h)=F(g i),but thentherulesoffunctorswouldletusreasonas
follows:
f h=F(f) F(h)=F(f h)=F(g i)=F(g) F(i)=g i .
Theresultingequation, f h=g i doesnotholdinFbecauseitisafreecategory
(thereare“noequations”):everytwopathsareconsidereddifferentmorphisms.Thus
ourproposedFisnotafunctor.
Example3.35(Functorsbetweenpreordersaremonotonemaps). RecallfromSection3.2.3
thatpreordersarecategorieswithatmostonemorphismbetweenanytwoobjects.A
functorbetweenpreordersisexactlyamonotonemap.
Forexample,consider thepreorder(N,≤)consideredasacategoryNwithobjects
Ob(N)=Nandauniquemorphismm→n iffm≤n.AfunctorF:N→N
sendseachobjectn ∈Ntoanobject F(n) ∈N. Itmust sendmorphisms inNto
morphisms inN.Thismeans if thereis tobeamorphismm→n thentheremust
alsobeamorphismF(m)→F(n).Inotherwords, ifm≤n, thenwemustalsohave
F(m)≤F(n).Butaslongasm≤nimpliesF(m)≤F(n),wehaveafunctor.
ThusafunctorF:N→NandamonotonemapN→Narethesamething.
Exercise3.36(Thecategoryofcategories). Backintheprimordialooze, thereisacate
goryCatinwhichtheobjectsarethemselvescategories.Yourtaskhereistoconstruct
thiscategory.
1. GivenanycategoryC,showthat thereexistsafunctor idC:C→C,knownasthe
identityfunctoronC,thatmapseachobjecttoitselfandeachmorphismtoitself.
NotethatafunctorC→DconsistsofafunctionfromOb(C)toOb(D)andforeach
pairofobjectsc1,c2∈CafunctionfromC(c1,c2)toD(F(c1),F(c2)).
2. ShowthatgivenF:C→DandG:D→E,wecandefineanewfunctor (F
G):C→Ejustbycomposingfunctions.
3. Showthatthereisacategory,callitCat,wheretheobjectsarecategories,morphisms
arefunctors,andidentitiesandcompositionaregivenasabove.
3.3.3 DatabaseInstancesasSet-ValuedFunctors
LetCbeacategory,andrecallthecategorySetfromDefinition3.17.AfunctorF:C→
Setisknownasaset-valuedfunctoronC.Muchofdatabasetheory(nothowtomake
themfast,butwhattheyareandwhatyoudowiththem)canbecastinthislight.
Indeed,wealreadysawinRemark3.13thatanydatabaseschemacanberegardedas
(presenting)acategoryC.Thenextthingtonoticeisthatthedataitself–anyinstanceof
thedatabase–isgivenbyaset-valuedfunctor I:C→Set.Theonlyadditionaldetail
94 Databases:Categories,Functors,andUniversalConstructions
isthat foranywhitenode, suchasc= string◦ ,wewant toforce I tomaptothesetof
strings.Wesuppressthisdetailinthefollowingdefinition.
Definition3.37. LetCbeaschema,i.e.afinitelypresentedcategory.AC-instanceisa
functorI:C→Set.5
Exercise3.38. Let1denotethecategorywithoneobject,called1,oneidentitymor
phismid1,andnoothermorphisms.ForanyfunctorF:1→Setonecanextractaset
F(1).Showthat,foranysetS,thereisafunctorFS:1→SetsuchthatFS(1)=S.
Theaboveexercisereaffirmsthatthesetofplanets,thesetofprimenumbers,andthe
setofflyingpigsareallset-valuedfunctors–instances–ontheschema1.Similarly,
set-valuedfunctorsonthecategory2arefunctions.Allourexamplessofarareforthe
situationwheretheschemaisafreecategory(noequations).Let’stryanexampleofa
categorythatisnotfree.
Example3.39. Considerthefollowingcategory:
(3.8)
What isaset-valuedfunctorF:C→Set?Itwillconsistofaset Z :=F(z)anda
functionS:=F(s):Z→Z,subjecttotherequirementthatS S=S.Herearesome
examples.
● Z is thesetofUScitizens, andSsendseachcitizentoherorhispresident.The
president’spresidentisher-orhimself.
● Z=NisthesetofnaturalnumbersandSsendseachnumberto0. Inparticular,0
goestoitself.
● Zisthesetofallwell-formedarithmeticexpressions,suchas13+(2∗4)or−5,that
onecanwriteusingintegersandthesymbols+,−,∗,(,).ThefunctionSevaluates
theexpression toreturnan integer,which is itself awell-formedexpression.The
evaluationofanintegerisitself.
● Z=N≥2,andSsendsntoitssmallestprimefactor.Thesmallestprimefactorofa
primeisitself.
5Warning:aC-instanceisastateofthedatabase“ataninstantintime.”Theterm“instance”shouldnotbe
confusedwithitsusageinobject-orientedprogramming,whichwouldcorrespondmoretowhatwecalla
rowr∈I(c).
3.3 Functors,NaturalTransformations,andDatabases 95
N≥2 Smallestprimefactor
2 2
3 3
4 2
. . . . . .
49 7
50 2
51 3
. . . . . .
Exercise3.40. Above,wethoughtof thesortofdatathatwouldmakesensefor the
schema (3.8).Give anexampleof the sort of data thatwouldmake sense for the
followingschemas:
Themainideaisthis:adatabaseschemaisacategory,andaninstanceonthatschema– thedata itself– isaset-valuedfunctor.All theconstraints, orbusiness rules, are
ensuredbytherulesoffunctors,namelythatfunctorspreservecomposition.6
3.3.4 NaturalTransformations
IfCisaschema–i.e. afinitelypresentedcategory–thentherearemanydatabase
instanceson it,whichwecanorganize intoacategory.But this ispart of a larger
story, namelythatofnatural transformations.Anabstractpicture tohave inmindis
this:
6Onecanputmorecomplexconstraints,calledembeddeddependencies,onadatabase;thesecorrespond
category-theoreticallytowhatarecalled“liftingproblems”incategorytheory.See[Spi14b]formoreon
this.
96
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Definition 3.41. Let C and D be categories, and let F,G: C → D be functors. To
specify a natural transformation α: F ⇒ G,
(i) for each object c ∈ C, one specifies a morphism αc: F(c) → G(c) in D, called the
c-component of α.
These components must satisfy the following, called the naturality condition:
(a) for every morphism f : c → d in C, the following equation must hold:
F( f) αd =αc G(f).
A natural transformation α: F → G is called a natural isomorphism if each
component αc is an isomorphism in D.
The naturality condition can also be written as a so-called commutative diagram.A
diagram in a category is drawn as a graph whose vertices and arrows are labeled by
objects and morphisms in the category. For example, here is a diagram that’s relevant to
the naturality condition in Definition 3.41:
(3.9)
Definition 3.42. A diagram D in C is a functor D: J → C from any category J, called
the indexing category of the diagram D. We say that D commutes if D( f) = D(f )
holds for every parallel pair of morphisms f, f : a → b in J.7
In terms of Eq. (3.9), the only case of two parallel morphisms is that of F(c) ⇒ G(d),
so to say that the diagram commutes is to say that F( f ) αd = αc G( f). This is exactly
the naturality condition from Definition 3.41.
Example 3.43. A representative picture is as follows:
7 Wecould package this formally by saying that D commutes iff it factors through the preorder reflection
of J.
3.3 Functors, Natural Transformations, and Databases
97
We have depicted, in blue and red respectively, two functors F,G: C → D. A nat
ural transformation α: F ⇒ G is given by choosing components α1: v → x and
α2: w → y.Wehavehighlighted the only choice for each in green: namely, α1 = c and
α2 = g.
The key point is that the functors F and G are ways of viewing the category C as
lying inside the category D. The natural transformation α, then, is a way of relating
these two views using the morphisms in D. Does this help you to see and appreciate the
notation
Example 3.44. We said in Exercise 3.38 that a functor 1 → Set can be identi
f
ied with a set. So suppose A and B are sets considered as functors A, B: 1 →
Set. A natural transformation between these functors is just a function between the
sets.
Definition 3.45. Let C and D be categories. We denote by DC the category whose
objects are functors F : C → D and whose morphisms DC(F,G) are the natural trans
formations α: F → G.Thiscategory DC is called the functor category,orthecategory
of functors from C to D.
Exercise 3.46. Let’s look more deeply at how DC is a category.
1. Figure out how to compose natural transformations. (Hint: an expert tells you “for
each object c ∈ C, compose the c-components.”)
2. Propose an identity natural transformation on any object F ∈ DC, and check that it
is unital (i.e. that it obeys condition (a) of Definition 3.2).
Example 3.47. In our new language, Example 3.44 says that Set1 is isomorphic to Set.
Example 3.48. Let N denote the category associated to the preorder (N,≤), and recall
from Example 3.35 that we can identify a functor F: N → N with a nondecreasing
sequence (F0, F1, F2,...)of natural numbers, i.e. F0 ≤ F1 ≤ F2 ≤···.IfG is another
functor, considered as a nondecreasing sequence, then what is a natural transformation
α: F →G?
Since there is at most one morphism between two objects in a preorder, each compo
nent αn: Fn → Gn has no data, it just tells us a fact: that Fn ≤ Gn. And the naturality
98
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
condition is vacuous: every square in a preorder commutes. So a natural transformation
between F and G exists iff Fn ≤ Gn for each n, and any two natural transformations
F ⇒Garethe same. In other words, the category NN is itself a preorder, namely the
preorder of monotone maps N → N.
Exercise 3.49. Let C be an arbitrary category and let P be a preorder, thought of as a
category. Consider the following statements:
1. For any two functors F,G: C → P, there is at most one natural transformation
F →G.
2. For any two functors F,G: P → C, there is at most one natural transformation
F →G.
For each, if it is true, say why; if it is false, give a counterexample.
Remark 3.50. Recall that in Remark 2.50 we said the category of preorders is equiv
alent to the category of Bool-categories. We can now state the precise meaning of
this sentence. First, there exists a category PrO in which the objects are preorders
and the morphisms are monotone maps. Second, there exists a category Bool-Cat in
which the objects are Bool-categories and the morphisms are Bool-functors. We call
these two categories equivalent because there exist functors F : PrO → Bool-Cat and
G: Bool-Cat → PrO such that there exist natural isomorphisms F G ∼
= idPrO and
G F∼ =idBool-Cat in the sense of Definition 3.41.
3.3.5
The Category of Instances on a Schema
Definition 3.51. Suppose that C is a database schema and I, J : C → Set are
database instances. An instance homomorphism between them is a natural transforma
tion α: I → J. Write C-Inst := SetC to denote the functor category as defined in
Definition 3.45.
Wesawin Example 3.44 that 1-Inst is isomorphic to the category Set. In this subsec
tion, we will show that there is a schema whose instances are graphs and whose instance
homomorphisms are graph homomorphisms.
Extended example: the category of graphs as a functor category
You may find yourself back in the primordial ooze (first discussed in Section 2.3.2),
because while previously we have been using graphs to present categories, now we
obtain graphs themselves as database instances on a specific schema (which is itself a
graph):
3.3 Functors, Natural Transformations, and Databases
99
Here is an example of a Gr-instance, i.e. a set-valued functor I : Gr → Set, in table
form:
Arrow source target
a 1 2
b 1 3
c 1 3
d 2 2
e 2 3
Vertex
1
2
3
4
(3.10)
Here I(Arrow) = {a,b,c,d,e}, and I(Vertex) = {1,2,3,4}. One can draw the
instance I as a graph:
Every row in the Vertex table is drawn as a vertex, and every row in the Arrow table is
drawn as an arrow, connecting its specified source and target. Every possible graph can
be written as a database instance on the schema Gr, and every possible Gr-instance can
be represented as a graph.
Exercise 3.52. In Eq. (3.2), a graph is shown (forget the distinction between white and
black nodes). Write down the corresponding Gr-instance, as in Eq. (3.10). (Do not be
concerned that you are in the primordial ooze.)
Thus the objects in the category Gr-Inst are graphs. The morphisms in Gr-Inst
are called graph homomorphisms. Let’s unwind this. Suppose that G, H : Gr → Set
are functors (i.e. Gr-instances); that is, they are objects G, H ∈ Gr-Inst.Amor
phism G → H is a natural transformation α: G → H between them; what does that
entail?
By Definition 3.41, since Gr has two objects, α consists of two components,
αVertex : G(Vertex) → H(Vertex)
and
αArrow: G(Arrow) → H(Arrow),
both of which are morphisms in Set. In other words, α consists of a function from
vertices of G to vertices of H and a function from arrows of G to arrows of H.
For these functions to constitute a graph homomorphism, they must “respect source
and target” in the precise sense that the naturality condition, Eq. (3.9), holds. That
100
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
is, for every morphism in Gr, namely source and target, the following diagrams must
commute:
These may look complicated, but they say exactly what we want. We want the func
tions αVertex and αArrow to respect source and targets in G and H. The left diagram
says “start with an arrow in G. You can either apply α to the arrow and then take its
source in H, or you can take its source in G and then apply α to that vertex; either
way you get the same answer.” The right-hand diagram says the same thing about
targets.
Example 3.53. Consider the graphs G and H shown below
Here they are, written as database instances– i.e. set-valued functors– on Gr:
G :=
H :=
Arrow source target
c
The top row is G and the bottom row is H. They are offset so you can more easily
complete the following exercise.
Arrow source target
a 1 2
b 2 3
4 5
d 4 5
e 5 5
Vertex
1
2
3
Vertex
4
5
Exercise 3.54. We claim that– with G, H as in Example 3.53– there is exactly one
graph homomorphism α: G → H such that αArrow(a) = d.
1. What is the other value of αArrow, and what are the three values of αVertex?
2. In your own copy of the tables of Example 3.53,drawαArrow as two lines connecting
the cells in the ID column of G(Arrow) to those in the ID column of H(Arrow).
Similarly, draw αVertex as connecting lines.
3. Check the source column and target column and make sure that the matches are
natural, i.e. that “alpha-then-source equals source-then-alpha” and similarly for
“target.”
3.4AdjunctionsandDataMigration 101
3.4 AdjunctionsandDataMigration
Wehavetalkedabouthowset-valuedfunctorsonaschemacanbeunderstoodasfilling
thatschemawithdata.Buttherearealsofunctorsbetweenschemas.Whenthetwosorts
offunctorsarecomposed,dataismigrated.Thisisthesimplestformofdatamigration;
morecomplexwaystomigratedatacomefromusingadjoints.Allof theaboveisthe
subjectofthissection.
3.4.1 PullingBackDataalongaFunctor
Tobegin,wewillmigratedatabetweenthegraph-indexingschemaGrandtheloop
schema,whichwecallDDS,shownbelow
WebeginbywritingdownasampleinstanceI:DDS→Setonthisschema:
State next
1 4
2 4
3 5
4 5
5 5
6 7
7 6
(3.11)
WecalltheschemaDDS,standingfordiscretedynamicalsystem.Indeed,wemaythink
ofthedataintheDDS-instanceoftable(3.11)aslistingthestatesandmovementsofa
deterministicmachine:ateverypoint intimethemachineisinoneofthelistedstates,
andgiventhemachineinoneof thestates, inthenext instant itmoves toauniquely
determinednextstate.
Ourgoalistomigratethedatain(3.11)todataonGr;thiswillgiveusthedataofa
graphandsoallowustovisualizeourmachine.
Wewilluseafunctorconnectingtheseschemasinordertomovedatabetweenthem.
Thereadercancreateanyfunctorshelikes,butwewilluseaspecificfunctorF:Gr→
DDStomigratedatainawaythatmakessensetous, theauthors.HerewedrawF,
usingcolorstoaidunderstanding:
102 Databases:Categories,Functors,andUniversalConstructions
ThefunctorFsendsbothobjectsofGrtothe“State”objectofDDS(asitmust).On
morphisms,itsendsthe“source”morphismtotheidentitymorphismon“State,”andthe
“target”morphismtothemorphism“next.”
Asampledatabase instanceonDDSwasgiveninEq. (3.11); recall that this isa
functorI:DDS→Set.Sonowwehavetwofunctorsasfollows:
(3.12)
ObjectsinGraresentbyFtoobjectsinDDS,whicharesentbyI toobjectsinSet,
whicharesets.MorphismsinGraresentbyFtomorphismsinDDS,whicharesent
byI tomorphisms inSet,whicharefunctions.ThisdefinesacompositefunctorF
I:Gr→Set.BothFandI respectidentitiesandcomposition,soF Idoestoo.Thus
wehaveobtainedaninstanceonGr, i.e.wehaveconvertedourdiscretedynamical
systemfromEq.(3.11)intoagraph!Whatgraphisit?
ForaninstanceonGr,weneedtofillanArrowtableandaVertextable.Bothof
thesearesentbyFtoState,solet’sfillbothwiththerowsofStateinEq.(3.11).Simi
larly,sinceFsends“source”totheidentityandsends“target”to“next,”weobtainthe
followingtables:
Arrow source target
1 1 4
2 2 4
3 3 5
4 4 5
5 5 5
6 6 7
7 7 6
Vertex
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Nowthatwehaveagraph,wecandrawit.
3.4 Adjunctions and Data Migration
103
Each arrow is labeled by its source vertex, as if to say, “What I do next is determined by
what I am now.”
Exercise 3.55. Consider the functor G: Gr → DDS given by sending “source” to
“next” and sending “target” to the identity on “State.” Migrate the same data, called I
in Eq. (3.11), using the functor G. Write down the tables and draw the corresponding
graph.
We refer to the above procedure– basically just composing functors as in Eq. (3.12)– as “pulling back data along a functor.” We just now pulled back data I along
functor F.
Definition 3.56. Let C and D be categories and let F: C → D be a functor. For any
set-valued functor I : D → Set, we refer to the composite functor F I : C → Set as
the pullback of I along F. Given a natural transformation α: I ⇒ J, there is a natural
transformation αF : F I ⇒ F J,whosecomponent (F I)(c) → (F J)(c)forany
c ∈ Ob(C) is given by (αF)c := αFc.
This uses the data of F to define a functor F : D-Inst → C-Inst.
Note that the term pullback is also used for a certain sort of limit; for more details see
Remark 3.85.
3.4.2
Adjunctions
In Section 1.4 we discussed Galois connections, which are adjunctions between pre
orders. Now that we have defined categories and functors, we can discuss adjunctions
in general. The relevance to databases is that the data migration functor 
from Defi
nition 3.56 always has two adjoints of its own: a left adjoint which we denote and a
right adjoint which we denote .
Recall that an adjunction between preorders P and Q is a pair of monotone maps
f : P → Qandg: Q → Pthatarealmost inverses: we have
f (p) ≤ q iff p ≤ g(q).
(3.13)
Recall from Section 3.2.3 that in a preorder P, a hom-set P(a,b) has one element
when a ≤ b, and no elements otherwise. We can thus rephrase Eq. (3.13) as an
isomorphism of sets Q( f(p),q) ∼
= P(p,g(q)): either both are one-element sets
or both are 0-element sets. This suggests how to define adjunctions in the general
case.
104
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Definition 3.57. Let CandDbecategories,and L: C → Dand R: D → Cbefunctors.
Wesay that L is left adjoint to R (and that R is right adjoint to L) if, for any c ∈ C and
d ∈D,there is an isomorphism of hom-sets
αc,d : C(c, R(d)) ∼ =
−→ D(L(c),d)
that is natural in c and d.8
Given a morphism f : c → R(d) in C, its image g := αc,d(f) is called its mate.
Similarly, the mate of g: L(c) → d is f.
To denote an adjunction we write L R, or in diagrams
with the ⇒ in the direction of the left adjoint.
Example 3.58. Recall that every preorder P can be regarded as a category. Galois con
nections between preorders and adjunctions between the corresponding categories are
exactly the same thing.
Example 3.59. Let B ∈ Ob(Set) be any set. There is an adjunction called “currying B,”
after the logician Haskell Curry:
Abstractly we write it as on the left, but what this means is that, for any sets A,C, there
is a natural isomorphism as on the right.
To explain this, we need to talk about exponential objects in Set. Suppose that B and
C are sets. Then the set of functions B → C is also a set; let’s denote it CB. It’s written
this way because if C has 10 elements and B has 3 elements then CB has 103 elements,
and more generally for any two finite sets |CB|=|C||B|.
The idea of currying is that, given sets A, B, and C, there is a one-to-one correspon
dence between functions (A × B) → C and functions A → CB. Intuitively, if I have a
function f of two variables a,b, I can “put off” entering the second variable: if you give
8 This naturality is between functors Cop × D → Set. It says that for any morphisms f : c→ c in C and
g: d →d inD,thefollowing diagram commutes:
3.4 Adjunctions and Data Migration
105
mejust a, I’ll return a function B → C that’s waiting for the B input. This is the curried
version of f . As one might guess, there is a formal connection between exponential
objects and what we called hom-elements b 
c in Definition 2.57.
Exercise 3.60. In Example 3.59, we discussed an adjunction between functors −×B
and (−)B. But we only said how these functors worked on objects: for an arbitrary set
X, they return sets X × B and XB respectively.
1. Given a morphism f : X → Y, what morphism should −×B: X × B → Y × B
return?
2. Given a morphism f : X → Y, what morphism should (−)B: XB → YB return?
3. Consider the function +: N × N → N, which sends (a,b)→ a + b.Currying+,
we get a certain function p: N → NN. What is p(3)?
Example 3.61. If you know some abstract algebra or topology, here are some other
examples of adjunctions.
1. Free constructions: given any set you get a free group, free monoid, free ring, free
vector space, etc.; each of these is a left adjoint. The corresponding right adjoint takes
a group, a monoid, a ring, a vector space, etc. and forgets the algebraic structure to
return the underlying set.
2. Similarly, given a graph you get a free preorder or a free category, as we discussed in
Section 3.2.3; each is a left adjoint. The corresponding right adjoint is the underlying
graph of a preorder or of a category.
3. Discrete things: given any set you get a discrete preorder, discrete graph, discrete
metric space, discrete category, discrete topological space; each of these is a left
adjoint. The corresponding right adjoint is again underlying set.
4. Codiscrete things: given any set you get a codiscrete preorder, complete graph, codis
crete category, codiscrete topological space; each of these is a right adjoint. The
corresponding left adjoint is the underlying set.
5. Given a group, you can quotient by its commutator subgroup to get an abelian group;
this is a left adjoint. The right adjoint is the inclusion of abelian groups into groups.
3.4.3
Left and Right Pushforward Functors, and 
Given F: C → D, the data migration functor F turns D-instances into C-instances.
This functor has both a left and a right adjoint:
106
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Using the names and in this context is fairly standard in category theory. In the
case of databases, they have the following helpful mnemonic:
Migration functor pronounced
reminiscent of
database idea
delta
sigma
pi
duplicate
or destroy
sum
product
duplicate or destroy
tables or columns
union (sum up) data
pair9 and query data
Just like we used F to pull back any discrete dynamical system along F: Gr →
DDSand get a graph, the migration functors F and F can be used to turn any graph
into a discrete dynamical system. That is, given an instance J : Gr → Set, we can get
instances F(J) and F(J) on DDS. This, however, is quite technical, and we leave
it to the adventurous reader to compute an example, with help perhaps from [Spi14a],
which explores the definitions of and in detail. A less technical shortcut is simply
to code up the computation in the open-source FQL software.
To get the basic idea across without getting mired in technical details, here we will
instead discuss a very simple example. Recall the schemas from Eq. (3.4). We can set
up a functor between them, the one sending black dots to black dots and white dots to
white dots:
With this functor F in hand, we can transform any B-instance into an A-instance using
F. Whereas was interesting in the case of turning discrete dynamical systems into
graphs in Section 3.4.1, it is not very interesting in this case. Indeed, it will just copy
for duplicate– the rows in Airline Seat into both Economy and First Class.
F has two adjoints, F and F, both of which transform any A-instance I into a
B-instance. The functor F does what one would most expect from reading the names
on each object: it will put into Airline Seat the union of Economy and First Class:
F(I)(Airline Seat) = I(Economy) I(First Class).
The functor F putsinto Airline Seat the set of those pairs (e, f ) where e is an Econ
omy seat, f is a First Class seat, and e and f have the same price and position. In this
particular example, one imagines that there should be no such seats in a valid instance
9 This is more commonly called “join” by database programmers.
3.4 Adjunctions and Data Migration
107
I, in which case F(I)(Airline Seat) would be empty. But in other uses of these same
schemas, F can be a useful operation. For example, in the schema A replace the label
‘Economy’ by‘RewardsProgram’, andin B replace‘Airline Seat’ by ‘First Class Seats’.
Then the operation F finds those first class seats that are also rewards program seats.
This operation is a kind of database query; querying is the operation that databases are
built for.
The moral is that complex data migrations can be specified by constructing functors
F between schemas and using the “induced” functors F, F, and F. Indeed, in
practice essentially all useful migrations can be built up from these. Hence the language
of categories provides a framework for specifying and reasoning about data migrations.
3.4.4
Single Set Summaries of Databases
To give a stronger idea of the flavor of and , we consider another special case,
namely where the target category D is equal to 1; see Exercise 3.6. In this case, there is
exactly one functor C → 1 for any C; let’s denote it
!: C →1.
(3.14)
Exercise 3.62. Describe the functor !: C → 1 from Eq. (3.14). Where does it send each
object? What about each morphism?
We want to consider the data migration functors !: C-Inst → 1-Inst and
! : C-Inst → 1-Inst. In Example 3.44, we saw that an instance on 1 is the same thing
as a set. So let’s identify 1-Inst with Set, and hence discuss
! : C-Inst → Set
and
! : C-Inst → Set.
Given any schema C and instance I : C → Set, we will get sets !(I) and !(I). Think
ing of these sets as database instances, each corresponds to a single one-column table
a controlled vocabulary– summarizing an entire database instance on the schema C.
Consider the following schema
Here’s a sample instance I : G → Set:
Email sent_by received_by
Em_1 Bob Grace
Em_2 Grace
Pat
Em_3 Bob
Em_4 Sue
Em_5 Doug
Emmy
Doug
Sue
Em_6 Bob Bob
(3.15)
Address
Bob
Doug
Emmy
Grace
Pat
Sue
108
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Exercise 3.63. Note that G from Eq. (3.15) is isomorphic to the schema Gr. In Sec
tion 3.3.5 we saw that instances on Gr are graphs. Draw the above instance I as a
graph.
Now we have a unique functor !: G → 1, and we want to say what !(I) and
!(I) give us as single-set summaries. First, !(I) tells us all the emailing groups
the “connected components”– in I:
1
Bob-Grace-Pat-Emmy
Sue-Doug
This form of summary, involving identifying entries into common groups, or quotients,
is typical of-operations.
The functor !(I) lists the emails from I which were sent from a person to her- or
him-self.
1
Em_6
This is again a sort of query, selecting the entries that fit the criterion of self-to-self
emails. Again, this is typical of-operations.
Where do these facts– that ! and ! act the way we said– come from? Everything
follows from the definition of adjoint functors (3.57): indeed we hope this, together
with the examples given in Example 3.61, give the reader some idea of how general and
useful adjunctions are, both in mathematics and in database theory.
One more point: while we will not spell out the details, we note that these operations
are also examples of constructions known as colimits and limits in Set. We end this
chapter with bonus material, exploring these key category theoretic constructions. The
reader should keep in mind that, in general and not just for functors to 1,-operations
are built from colimits in Set, and-operations are built from limits in Set.
3.5
3.5.1
Bonus: An Introduction to Limits and Colimits
What do products of sets, the results of !-operations on database instances, and
meets in a preorder all have in common? The answer, as we shall see, is that they are
all examples of limits. Similarly, disjoint unions of sets, the results of !-operations
on database instances, and joins in a preorder are all colimits. Let’s begin with
limits.
Recall that ! takes a database instance I : C → Set and turns it into a set !(I).
More generally, a limit turns a functor F : C → D into an object of D.
Terminal Objects and Products
Terminal objects and products are each a sort of limit. Let’s discuss them in turn.
3.5 Bonus: An Introduction to Limits and Colimits
109
Terminal objects
The most basic limit is a terminal object.
Definition 3.64. Let C be a category. Then an object Z in C is a terminal object if, for
each object C of C, there exists a unique morphism !: C → Z.
Since this unique morphism exists for all objects in C, we say that terminal objects
have a universal property.
Example 3.65. In Set, any set with exactly one element is a terminal object. Why? Con
sider some such set {•}. Then for any other set C we need to check that there is exactly
one function !: C →{•}.This unique function is the one that does the only thing that
can be done: it maps each element c ∈ C to the element •∈{•}.
Exercise 3.66. Let (P,≤) be a preorder, let z ∈ P be an element, and let P be the
corresponding category (see Section 3.2.3). Show that z is a terminal object in P if and
onlyifitisatop element in P: that is, if and only if for all c ∈ P we have c ≤ z.
Exercise 3.67. Name a terminal object in the category Cat. (Hint: recall Exercise
3.62.)
Exercise 3.68. Not every category has a terminal object. Find one that doesn’t.
Proposition 3.69. All terminal objects in a category C are isomorphic.
Proof. This is a simple, but powerful standard argument. Suppose Z and Z are both
terminal objects in some category C. Then there exist (unique) maps a: Z → Z and
b: Z→ Z.Composing these, we get a map a b: Z → Z. Now since Z is termi
nal, this map Z → Z must be unique. But idZ is also such a map. So we must have
a b = idZ. Similarly, we find that b a = idZ . Thus a is an isomorphism, with
inverse b.
Remark 3.70 (“The limit” vs. “a limit”). Not only are all terminal objects isomorphic,
there is a unique isomorphism between any two. We hence say “terminal objects are
unique up to unique isomorphism.” To a category theorist, this is very nearly the same
thing as saying “all terminal objects are equal.” Thus we often abuse terminology and
talk of “the” terminal object, rather than “a” terminal object. We will do the same for any
sort of limit or colimit, e.g. speak of “the product” of two sets, rather than “a product.”
Wesaw asimilar phenomenon in Definition 1.76.
110
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
Products
Products are slightly more complicated to formalize than terminal objects, but they are
familiar in practice.
Definition 3.71. Let C be a category, and let X,Y be objects in C.Aproduct of X
and Y is an object, denoted X × Y, together with morphisms pX : X × Y → X and
pY : X ×Y →Y suchthat for all objects C together with morphisms f : C → X and
g: C →Y,there exists a unique morphism C → X ×Y, denoted f,g , for which the
following diagram commutes:
We will try to bring this down to earth in Example 3.72. Before we do, note that
X ×Y isan object equipped with morphisms to X and Y. Roughly speaking, it is like
“the best object-equipped-with-morphisms-to-X-and-Y”inallofC, in the sense that any
other object-equipped-with-morphisms-to-X-and-Y maps to it uniquely. This is called a
universal property. It’s customary to use a dotted line to indicate the unique morphism
that exists because of some universal property.
Example 3.72. In Set, a product of two sets X and Y is their usual cartesian product
X ×Y :={(x,y) | x ∈ X,y ∈ Y},
which comes with two projections pX : X × Y → X and pY : X × Y → Y, given by
pX(x, y) := x and pY(x, y) := y.
Given any set C with functions f : C → X and g: C → Y, the unique map from C
to X×Y suchthattherequired diagram commutes is given by f,g(c) := ( f(c),g(c)).
Here is a picture of the product 6 × 4 of sets 6 and 4.
3.5 Bonus: An Introduction to Limits and Colimits
111
Exercise 3.73. Let (P,≤) be a preorder, let x, y ∈ P be elements, and let P be the
corresponding category. Show that the product x × y in P agrees with their meet x ∧ y
in P.
Example 3.74. Given two categories C and D, their product C × D may be given as
follows. The objects of this category are pairs (c,d), where c is an object of C and d is
an object of D. Similarly, morphisms (c,d) → (c,d)arepairs( f,g)where f : c → c
is a morphism in C and g: d → d is a morphism in D. Composition of morphisms is
simply given by composing each entry in the pair separately, so ( f,g) ( f ,g) =
( f f ,g g).
Exercise 3.75.
1. What are the identity morphisms in a product category C × D?
2. Whyis composition in a product category associative?
3. What is the product category 1 × 2?
4. What is the product category P × Q when P and Q are preorders and P and Q are
the corresponding categories?
These two constructions, terminal objects and products, are subsumed by the notion
of limit.
3.5.2
Limits
We’ll get a little abstract. Consider the definition of product. This says that, given any
pair of maps X f ←− C g −→ Y, there exists a unique map C → X × Y such that certain
diagrams commute. This has the flavor of being terminal– there is a unique map to
X ×Y–butitseems a bit more complicated. How are the two ideas related?
It turns out that products are terminal objects, but of a different category, which we’ll
call Cone(X,Y), the category of cones over X and Y in C. We shall see in Exercise 3.76
that X pX
←− X×Y pY−→Y isaterminal object in Cone(X,Y).
An object of Cone(X,Y) is simply a pair of maps X f ←− C g −
→Y.Amorphism from
X f ←− C g −→ Y to X f ←− C g −→ Y in Cone(X,Y) is a morphism a: C → C in C such
that the following diagram commutes:
Exercise 3.76. Check that a product X pX
←− X ×Y pY−→ Y is exactly the same as a
terminal object in Cone(X,Y).
112
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
We’re now ready for the abstract definition. Don’t worry if the details are unclear;
the main point is that it is possible to unify terminal objects, maximal elements, and
meets, products of sets, preorders, and categories, and many other familiar friends under
the scope of a single definition. In fact, they’re all just terminal objects in different
categories.
Recall from Definition 3.42 that, formally speaking, a diagram in C is just a functor
D: J →C.HereJiscalled the indexing category of the diagram D.
Definition 3.77. Let D: J → C be a diagram. A cone (C,c∗) over D consists of
(i) an object C ∈ C;
(ii) for each object j ∈ J, a morphism cj : C → D(j).
To be a cone, these must satisfy the following property:
(a) for each f : j → k in J,wehaveck = cj D(f).
A morphism of cones (C,c∗) → (C,c∗) is a morphism a: C → C in C such that
for all j ∈ J we have cj = a cj . Cones over D, and their morphisms, form a category
Cone(D).
The limit of D, denoted lim(D), is the terminal object in the category Cone(D). Say
it is the cone lim(D) = (C,c∗); we refer to C as the limit object and the map cj for any
j ∈ Jasthe jth projection map.
For visualization purposes, if J is the free category on the graph
with five objects and five non-identity morphisms, then we may draw a diagram D: J →
C inside C as on the left below, and a cone on it as on the right:
Here, any two parallel paths that start at C are considered the same. Note that both these
diagrams depict a collection of objects and morphisms inside the category C.
Example 3.78. Terminal objects are limits where the indexing category is empty,
J =∅.
3.5Bonus:AnIntroductiontoLimitsandColimits 113
Example3.79. Productsarelimitswheretheindexingcategoryconsistsoftwoobjects
v,wandnoarrows,J= v • w • .
3.5.3 FiniteLimitsinSet
Recallthatthisdiscussionwasinspiredbywantingtounderstand-operations,andin
particular !.Wecannowseethatadatabaseinstance I:C→Set isadiagramin
Set.Thefunctor ! takesthelimitofthisdiagram.Inthissubsectionwegiveaformula
describingtheresult.ThiscapturesallfinitelimitsinSet.
Indatabasetheory,weworkwithcategoriesCthatarepresentedbyafinitegraph
plusequations.Wewon’texplainthedetails,butinfactit’senoughjusttoworkwiththe
graphpart:asfaraslimitsareconcerned,theequationsinCdon’tmatter.Forconsistency
withtherestofthissection,let’sdenotethedatabaseschemabyJinsteadofC.
Theorem3.80. LetJbeacategorypresentedbythefinitegraph(V,A,s,t)together
with some equations, and let D: J→Set be a set-valued functor.WriteV =
{v1,...,vn}.Theset
lim
J
D:= (d1,...,dn)|di∈D(vi)forall1≤i≤nand
foralla:vi→vj∈A,wehaveD(a)(di)=dj
togetherwiththeprojectionmapspi : (limJD)→D(vi)givenbypi(d1,...,dn) :=
di,isalimitofD.
Example3.81. If J istheemptygraph•, thenn=0: therearenovertices.Thereis
exactlyoneemptytuple( ),whichvacuouslysatisfies theproperties, sowe’vecon
structedthelimitasthesingletonset{()}consistingofjust theemptytuple.Thusthe
limit of theemptydiagram, i.e. the terminal object inSet, is thesingletonset.See
Remark3.70.
Exercise3.82. Showthat thelimit formulainTheorem3.80worksforproducts.See
Example3.79.
Exercise3.83. IfD:1→Setisafunctor,what isthelimitofD?Computeitusing
Theorem3.80,andcheckyouransweragainstDefinition3.77.
Pullbacks
Inparticular,theconditionthatthelimitofD:J→Setselectstuples(d1,...,dn)such
thatD(a)(di)=dj foreachmorphisma: i→j inJallowsustouselimitstoselect
114 Databases:Categories,Functors,andUniversalConstructions
data that satisfiescertainequationsorconstraints.This iswhat allowsus toexpress
queriesintermsoflimits.Hereisanexample.
Example3.84. IfJispresentedbythecospangraph x • f−−→a • g←−−y • ,thenitslimitis
knownasapullback.GiventhediagramX f −→A g ←−Y,thepullbackistheconeshown
ontheleftbelow:
The fact that thediagramcommutesmeans that thediagonal arrowca is insome
sensesuperfluous,soonegenerallydenotespullbacksbydroppingthediagonalarrow,
naming the conepoint X×AY, andadding the symbol, as shown to the right
above.
HereisapicturetohelpusunpackthedefinitioninSet.WetakeX=6,Y=4,and
Atobethesetofcolors{red,blue,black}.
Thefunctions f :6→Aandg:4→Aareexpressedinthecoloringof thedots:
for example, g(2)=g(4)=red,while f(5)=black.Thepullbackselectspairs
(i, j)∈6×4suchthat f(i)andg(j)havethesamecolor.
Remark3.85. AsmentionedfollowingDefinition3.56, thisdefinitionofpullbackis
not tobeconfusedwiththepullbackofaset-valuedfunctoralongafunctor; theyare
fornowbest thoughtofasdifferentconceptswhichaccidentallyhavethesamename.
Owingtothepoweroftheprimordialooze,however, thepullbackalongafunctorisa
specialcaseofpullbackasthelimitofacospan:itcanbeunderstoodasthepullbackof
acertaincospaninCat.Tounpackthisrequiresthenotionsofcategoryofelementsand
discreteopfibration;askyourfriendlyneighborhoodcategorytheorist.
3.6 Summary and Further Reading
115
3.5.4
3.6
A Brief Note on Colimits
Just like upper bounds have a dual concept– namely that of lower bounds– so limits
have a dual concept: colimits. To expose the reader to this concept, we provide a succinct
definition of these using opposite categories and opposite functors. The point, however,
is just exposure; we will return to explore colimits in detail in Chapter 6.
Exercise 3.86. Recall from Example 3.20 that every category C has an oppo
site Cop. Let F: C → D be a functor. How should we define its opposite,
Fop: Cop → Dop? That is, how should Fop act on objects, and how should it act on
morphisms?
Definition 3.87. Given a category C we say that a cocone in C is a cone in Cop.
Given a diagram D: J → C, we may take the limit of the functor Dop: Jop → Cop.
This is a cone in Cop, and so by definition a cocone in C.Thecolimit of D is this
cocone.
Definition 3.87 is like a compressed file: useful for transmitting quickly, but com
pletely useless for working with, unless you can successfully unpack it. We will unpack
it later in Chapter 6 when we discuss electric circuits.
Summary and Further Reading
Congratulations on making it through one of the longest chapters in the book! We apol
ogize for the length, but this chapter had a lot of work to do. Namely it introduced the
“big three” of category theory– categories, functors, and natural transformations– as
well as discussing adjunctions, limits, and very briefly colimits.
That’s really quite a bit of material. For more on all these subjects, one can consult any
standard book on category theory, of which there are many. The bible (old, important,
seminal, and requires a priest to explain it) is [Mac98]; another thorough introduction
is [Bor94]; a logical perspective is given in [Awo10]; a computer science perspective
is given in [BW90], [Pie91], and [Wal92]; math students should probably read [Lei14],
[Rie17], or [Gra18]; a general audience might start with [Spi14a].
Wepresentedcategories from a database perspective, because data is pretty ubiquitous
in our world. A database schema– i.e. a system of interlocking tables– can be captured
by a category C, and filling it with data corresponds to a functor C → Set.HereSet is
the category of sets, perhaps the most important category to mathematicians.
The perspective of using category theory to model databases has been rediscovered
several times. It seems to have first been discussed by various authors around the mid
1990s [IP94; CD95; PS95; TG96]. Bob Rosebrugh and collaborators took it much fur
ther in a series of papers including [FGR03; JR02; RW92]. Most of these authors tend to
focus on sketches, which are more expressive categories. Spivak rediscovered the idea
again quite a bit later, but focused on categories rather than sketches, so as to have all
116
Databases: Categories, Functors, and Universal Constructions
three data migration functors , , ;see[Spi12; SW15b]. The version of this story
presented in the chapter, including the white and black nodes in schemas, is part of a
larger theory of algebraic databases, where a programming language such as Java or
Haskell is attached to a database. The technical details are worked out in [Sch+17], and
its use in database integration projects can be found in [SW15a; Wis+15].
Before we leave this chapter, we want to emphasize two things: coherence conditions
and universal constructions.
Coherence conditions
In the definitions of category, functor, and natural transformations, we have data
(indexed by (i)) that is required to satisfy certain properties (indexed by (a)). Indeed,
for categories it was about associativity and unitality of composition, for functors it
was about respecting composition and identities, and for natural transformations it was
the naturality condition. These conditions are often called coherence conditions:we
want the various structures to cohere, to work well together, rather than to flop around
unattached.
Understanding why these particular structures and coherence conditions are “the right
ones” is more science than mathematics: we empirically observe that certain combina
tions result in ideas that are both widely applicable and also strongly compositional.
That is, we become satisfied with coherence conditions when they result in beautiful
mathematics down the road.
Universal constructions
Universal constructions are one of the most important themes of category theory.
Roughly speaking, one gives some specified shape in a category and says “find me the
best solution!” And category theory comes back and says “do you want me to approx
imate from the left or the right (colimit or limit)?” You respond, and either there is a
best solution or there is not. If there is, it’s called the (co)limit; if there’s not we say “the
(co)limit does not exist.”
Evendata migration fits this form. We say “find methe closest thing in D that matches
my C-instance using my functor F: C → D.” In fact this approach– known as Kan
extensions– subsumes the others. One of the two founders of category theory, Saunders
Mac Lane, has a section in his book [Mac98] called “All concepts are Kan extensions,”
a big statement, no?
